




                               Daemonologie

                          In Form of a Dialogue

                        Divided into three Books.

                               By James RX

                      Printed by Robert Waldegrave,

                 Printer to the King's Majesty. An. 1597.

                          Come Privilegio Regio.





CONTENTS


The Preface. To The Reader.
First Book.
   Chap. I.
   Chap. II.
   Chap. III.
   Chap. IIII.
   Chap. V.
   Chap. VI.
   Chap. VII.
Second Book.
   Chap. I.
   Chap. II.
   Chap. III.
   Chap. IIII.
   Chap. V.
   Chap. VI.
   Chap. VII.
Third Book.
   Chap. I.
   Chap. II.
   Chap. III.
   Chap. IIII.
   Chap. V.
   Chap. VI.
News from Scotland.
   To the Reader.
   Discourse.






THE PREFACE. TO THE READER.


The fearful abounding at this time in this country, of these
detestable slaves of the Devil, the Witches or enchanters, has moved me
(beloved reader) to dispatch in post, this following treatise of mine, not
in any wise (as I protest) to serve for a show of my learning and ingenuity,
but only (moved of conscience) to press thereby, so farr as I can, to
resolve the doubting hearts of many; both that such assaults of Satan are
most certainly practiced, and that the instruments thereof, merits most
severely to be punished: against the damnable opinions of two principally
in our age, whereof the one called SCOT an  Englishman, is not ashamed in
public print to deny, that there can be such a thing as Witchcraft: and
so maintains the old error of the Sadducees, in denying of spirits. The
other called WIERUS, a German Physician, sets out a public apology for
all these crafts-folk, whereby, procuring for their impunity, he
plainly betrays himself to have been one of that profession. And for to
make this treatise the more pleasant and facile, I have put it in form
of a Dialogue, which I have divided into three books: The first speaking
of Magic in general, and Necromancy in special. The second of Sorcery
and Witchcraft: and the third, contains a discourse of all these kinds
of spirits, and Spectres that appears and troubles persons: together with a
conclusion of the whole work. My intention in this labour, is only to prove
two things, as I have already said: the one, that such devilish arts
have been and are. The other, what exact trial and severe punishment they
merit: and therefore reason I, what kind of things are possible to be
performed in these arts, and by what natural causes they may be, not that I
touch every particular thing of the Devil's power, for that were infinite:
but only, to speak scholastically, (since this can not be spoken in our
language) I reason upon _genus_ leaving species, _and differentia_ to be
comprehended therein. As for example, speaking of the power of Magicians,
in the first book and sixth Chapter: I say, that they can suddenly cause be
brought unto them, all kinds of dainty dishes, by their familiar
spirit: Since as a thief he delights to steal, and as a spirit, he can
subtly and suddenly enough transport the same. Now under this _genus_
may be comprehended all particulars, depending thereupon; Such as the
bringing Wine out of a Wall, (as we have heard often to have been practised)
and such others; which particulars, are sufficiently proved by the
reasons of the general. And such like in the second book of Witchcraft
in special, and fifth Chap. I say and prove by diverse arguments, that
Witches can, by the power of their Master, cure or cast on diseases: Now
by these same reasons, that proves their power by the Devil of diseases
in generally is as well proved their power in special: as of weakening the
nature of some men, to make them unable for women: and making it to abound
in others, more then the ordinary course of nature would permit. And such
like in all other particular sickness; But one thing I will pray you to
observe in all these places, where I reason upon the devil's power, which
is the different ends and scopes, that God as the first cause, and the
Devil as his instrument and second cause shoots at in all these actions
of the Devil, (as God's hangman:) For where the devil's intention in them
is ever to perish, either the soul or the body, or both of them, that he
is so permitted to deal with: God by the contrary, draws ever out of
that evil glory to himself, either by the wreck of the wicked in his
justice, or by the trial of the patient, and amendment of the faithful,
being wakened up with that rod of correction. Having thus declared unto
you then, my full intention in this Treatise, you will easily excuse, I
doubt not, as well my omitting, to declare the whole particular rites
and secrets of these unlawful arts: as also their infinite and
wonderful practices, as being neither of them pertinent to my purpose:
the reason whereof, is given in the hinder end of the first Chapter of
the third book: and who likes to be curious in these things, he may
read, if he will here of their practices, BODINUS Demonomania, collected
with greater diligence, then written with judgment, together with their
confessions, that have been at this time apprehended. If he would know what
has been the opinion of the Ancients, concerning their power: he shall
see it well described by HYPERIUS, and HEMMINGIUS, two late Germain writers:
Besides innumerable other neoteric Theologians, that writes largely upon
that subject: And if he would know what are the particular rites, &
curiosities of these black arts (which is both unnecessary and perilous,)
he will find it in the fourth book of CORNELIUS Agrippa, and in WIERUS,
of whom I spoke. And so wishing my pains in this Treatise (beloved Reader}
to be effectual, in arming all them that reads the same, against these
above mentioned errors, and recommending my good will to your friendly
acceptance, I bid you heartily fare-well.

JAMES Rx.





FIRST BOOK.


ARGUMENT.

_The introduction of the whole. The description of Magic in special._




Chap. I.


ARGUMENT.

_Proven by the Scripture, that these unlawful arts in_ genere, _have
been and may be put in practice._

PHILOMATHES and EPISTEMON reason the matter.

PHILOMATHES.

I am surely very glad to have met with you this day, for I am of
opinion, that you can better resolve me of some thing, whereof I stand in
great doubt, than any other with whom I could have met.

EPI. In what I can, that you like to ask at me, I will willingly and
freely tell my opinion, and if I prove it not sufficiently, I am heartily
content that a better reason carry it away then.

PHI. What think you of these strange news, which now only furnishes
purpose to all men at their meeting: I mean of these Witches?

EPI. Surely they are wonderful: And I think so clear and plain
confessions in that purpose, have never fallen out in any age or country.

PHI. No question if they be true, but thereof the Doctors doubts.

EPI. What part of it doubt you of?

PHI. Even of all, for ought I can yet perceive: and namely, that there is
such a thing as Witchcraft or Witches, and I would pray you to resolve me
thereof if you may: for I have reasoned with sundry in that matter, and
yet could never be satisfied therein.

EPI. I shall with good will do the best I can: But I think it the
more difficult, since you deny the thing itself in general: for as it is
said in the logic schools, _Contra negantem principia non est
disputandum_. Always for that part, that witchcraft, and Witches have
been, and are, the former part is clearly proved by the Scriptures, and
the last by daily experience and confessions.

PHI. I know you will allege me _Saul's Pythoness_: but that as appears
will not make much for you.

EPI. Not only that place, but divers others: But I marvel why that should
not make much for me?

PHI. The reasons are these, first you may consider, that _Saul_ being
troubled in spirit, (M1) and having fasted long before, as the text
testifies, and being come to a woman that was reported to have such
knowledge, and that to inquire so important news, he having so guilty a
conscience for his heinous offences, and specially, for that same unlawful
curiosity, and horrible defection: and then the woman crying out upon the
sudden in great admiration, for the uncouth sight that she alleged to
have seen, discovering him to be the King, though disguised, and denied by
him before: it was no wonder I say, that his senses being thus
distracted, he could not perceive her feigning of her voice, he being
himself in an other chamber, and seeing nothing. Next what could be, or
was raised? The spirit of _Samuel_? Profane and against all Theology:
the Devil in his likeness? as imperceptible, that either God would permit
him to come in the shape of his Saints (for then could never the Prophets
in those days have been sure, what Spirit spoke to them in their
visions) or then that he could fore-tell what was to come there after;
for Prophecy proceeds only of GOD: and the Devil has no knowledge
of things to come.

EPI. Yet if you will mark the words of the text, you will find clearly,
that _Saul_ saw that apparition: for giving you that _Saul_ was in an
other Chamber, at the making of the circles and conjurations, necessary for
that purpose (as none of that craft will permit any others to behold at
that time) yet it is evident by the text, that how son that once that
unclean spirit was fully risen, she called in upon _Saul_. For it is
said in the text, that _Saul knew him to be Samuel_, which could not
have been, by the hearing tell only of an old man with an mantle, since
there was many more old men dead in _Israel_ than _Samuel_: And the common
garb of that whole Country was mantles. As to the next, that it was not
the spirit of _Samuel_, I grant: In the proving whereof you need not to
insist, since all Christians of whatsoever Religion agrees upon that: and
none but either mere ignorant folk, or Necromancers or Witches doubts
thereof. And that the Devil is permitted at sometimes to put himself in
the likeness of the Saints, it is plain in the Scriptures, where it is
said, that _Satan can trans-form himself into an Angel of light_. (M2)
Neither could that bring any inconvenient with the visions of the
Prophets, since it is most certain, that God will not permit him so to
deceive his own: but only such, as first willfully deceives them-selves, by
running unto him, whom God then suffers to fall in their own snares, and
justly permits them to be eluded with great efficacy of deceit,
because they would not believe the truth (as _Paul_ saith). And as to the
devil's foretelling of things to come, it is true that he knows not all
things future, but yet that he knows part, the Tragic event of this
history declares it, (which the wit of woman could never have
fore-spoken) not that he has any prescience, which is only proper to God:
or yet knows any thing by looking upon God, as in a mirror (as the good
Angels do) he being for ever debarred from the favorable presence &
countenance of his creator, but only by one of these two means, either as
being worldly wise, and taught by an continual experience, ever since
the creation, judges by likelihood of things to come, according to the
like that has passed before, and the natural causes, in respect of the
vicissitude of all things worldly: Or else by God's employing of him in a
turn, and so foreseen thereof: as appears to have been in this, whereof
we find the very like in _Micah_ prophetic discourse to King
_Ahab_. (M3) But to prove this my first proposition, that there can be
such a thing as witchcraft, and witches, there are many more places in the
Scriptures then this (as I said before). As first in the law of God, it is
plainly prohibited: (M4) But certain it is, that the Law of God speaks
nothing in vain, nether does it lay curses, or enjoin punishments upon
shadows, condemning that to be il, which is not in essence or being as
we call it. Secondly it is plain, where wicked _Pharaohs_ wise-men
imitated one number of _Moses_ miracles, (M5) to harden the tyrants heart
there by. Thirdly, said not _Samuel_ to _Saul_, (M6) that _disobedience
is as the sin of Witchcraft_? To compare to a thing that were not, it
were too too absurd. Fourthly, was not _Simon Magus_, a man of that
craft? (M7) And fifthly, what was she that had the spirit of _Python_?
(M8) beside innumerable other places that were irksome to recite.




Chap. II.


ARGUMENT.

_What kind of sin the practitioners of these unlawful arts commits. The
division of these arts. And what are the means that allures any to
practice them._

PHILOMATHES.

But I think it very strange, that God should permit any man-kind (since
they bear his own Image) to fall in so gross and filthy a defection.

EPI. Although man in his Creation was (M9) made to the Image of the
Creator, yet through his fall having once lost it, it is but restored
again in a part by grace only to the elect: So all the rest falling
away from God, are given over in the hands of the Devil that enemy, to
bear his Image: and being once so given over, the greatest and the
gross impiety, is the pleasant, and most delightful unto them.

PHI. But may it not suffice him to have indirectly the rule, and procure
the perdition of so many souls by alluring them to vices, and to the
following of their own appetites, suppose he abuse not so many simply
souls, in making them directly acknowledge him for their master.

EPI. No surely, for he uses every man, whom of he has the rule,
according to their complexion and knowledge: And so whom he finds most
simply, he most plainly discovers himself unto them. For he being the
enemy of mans Salvation, uses all the means he can to entrap them so
farr in his snares, as it may be unable to them thereafter (suppose they
would) to rid themselves out of the same.

PHI. Then this sin is a sin against the holy Ghost.

EPI. It is in some, but not in all.

PHI. How that? Are not all these that runs directly to the Devil in
one Category.

EPI. God forbid, for the sin against the holy Ghost has two branches:
The one a falling back from the whole service of GOD, and a refusal of
all his precepts. The other is the doing of the first with knowledge,
knowing that they do wrong against their own conscience, and the
testimony of (M10) the holy Spirit, having once had a taste of the
sweetness of God's mercies. Now in the first of these two, all sorts of
Necromancers, Enchanters or Witches, are comprehended: but in the last,
none but such as errs with this knowledge that I have spoken of.

PHI. Then it appears that there are more sorts than one, that are
directly professors of his service: and if so be, I pray you tell me how
many, and what are they?

EPI. There are principally two sorts, to which all the parts of that
unhappy art are reduced; whereof the one is called _Magic_ or
_Necromancy_, the other _Sorcery_ or _Witchcraft_.

PHI. What I pray you? and how many are the means, whereby the Devil
allures persons in any of these snares?

EPI. Even by these three passions that are within ourselves: Curiosity
in great ingenuity: thirst of revenge, for some wrongs deeply apprehended:
or greedy appetite of gear, caused through great poverty. As to the
first of these, Curiosity, it is only the enticement of _Magicians_, or
_Necromancers_: and the other two are the tempters of the _Sorcerers_,
or _Witches_, for that old and crafty Serpent, being a spirit, he
easily spies our affections, and so conforms himself thereto, to
deceive us to our wreck.




Chap. III.


ARGUMENT.

_The significations and Etymologies of the words of_ Magic _and_
Necromancy. _The difference between_ Necromancy _and_ Witchcraft: _What
are the entrances, and beginnings, that brings any to the knowledge
thereof._

PHILOMATHES.

I Would gladly first hear, what thing is it that you call _Magic_ or
_Necromancy_.

EPI. This word _Magic_ in the _Persian_ tongue, imports as much as to be
one contemplator or Interpreter of Divine and heavenly sciences: which
being first used amongst the _Chaldeans_, through their ignorance of the
true divinity, was esteemed and reputed amongst them, as a principal
virtue: And therefore, was named unjustly with an honorable style, which
name the _Greeks_ imitated, generally importing all these kinds of
unlawful arts.

And this word _Necromancy_ is a Greek word, compounded of Νεκρων &
μαντεια, which is to say, the Prophecy by the dead. This last name is
given, to this black and unlawful science by the figure _Synecdoche_,
because it is a principal part of that art, to serve themselves with dead
carcasses in their divinations.

_Phi._ What difference is there between this art, and Witchcraft.

EPI. Surely, the difference vulgar put between them, is very merry,
and in a manner true; for they say, that the Witches are servants only,
and slaves to the Devil; but the Necromancers are his masters and
commanders.

PHI. How can that be true, that any men being specially addicted to his
service, can be his commanders?

EPI. Yes, they may be: but it is only _secundum quid_: For it is not by
any power that they can have over him, but _ex pacto_ only: whereby
he obliges himself in some trifles to them, that he may on the other part
obtain the fruition of their body and soul, which is the only thing he
hunts for.

PHI. An very inequitable contract indeed: But I pray you discourse
unto me, what is the effect and secrets of that art?

EPI. That is over large an field you give me: yet I shall do good-will,
the most summarily that I can, to rune through the principal points
thereof. As there are two sorts of folks, that may be enticed to this
art, to wit, learned or unlearned: so is there two means, which are the
first instigators up and feeders of their curiosity, thereby to make them to
give themselves over to the same: Which two means, I call the Devils
school, and his rudiments. The learned have their curiosity wakened
vp; and fed by that which I call his school: this is the _Astrology_
judicial. For divers men having attained to a great perfection in
learning, and yet remaining overbore (alas) of the spirit of regeneration
and fruits thereof: finding all natural things common, as well to the
stupid pedants as unto them, they assay to vindicate unto them a greater
name, by not only knowing the course of things heavenly, but likewise to
cling to the knowledge of things to come thereby. Which, at the first face
appearing lawful unto them, in respect the ground thereof seems to
proceed of natural causes only: they are so allured thereby, that
finding their practice to prove true in sundry things, they study to
know the cause thereof: and so mounting from degree to degree, upon the
slippery and uncertain scale of curiosity; they are at last enticed,
that where lawful arts or sciences fails, to satisfy their restless
minds, even to seek to that black and unlawful science of _Magic_.
Where, finding at the first, that such divers forms of circles &
conjurations rightly joined to it, will raise such divers forms of
spirits, to resolve them of their doubts: and attributing the doing
thereof, to the power inseparably tied, or inherent in the circles: and
many words of God, confusedly wrapped in; they blindly glory of
themselves, as if they had by their quickness of ingenuity, made a conquest of
_Pluto's_ dominion, and were become Emperors over the _Stygian_
dwellings. Where, in the mean time (miserable wretches) they are become
in very deed, bond-slaves to their mortal enemy: and their knowledge,
for all that they presume thereof, is nothing increased, except in knowing
evil, and the horrors of Hell for punishment thereof, as _Adams_ was by
the eating of the forbidden tree. (M11)




Chap. IIII.


ARGUMENT.

_The Description of the Rudiments and School, which are the entrances to
the art of_ Magic: _And in special the differences between_ Astronomy
_and_ Astrology: _Division of_ Astrology _in divers parts._

PHILOMATHES.

But I pray you likewise forget not to tell what are the Devil's
rudiments.

EPI. His rudiments, I call first in general, all that which is called
vulgarly the virtue of word, herb, and stone: which is used by unlawful
charms, without natural causes. As likewise all kind of practices,
omens, or other like extraordinary actions, which cannot abide the
true touch of natural reason.

PHI. I would have you to make that plainer, by some particular examples;
for your proposition is very general.

EPI. I mean either by such kind of Charms as commonly daft wives
uses, for healing of bewitched goods, for preserving them from evil
eyes, by knitting rowan trees, or sundry kind of herbs, to the hair
or tails of the goods: By curing the Worm, by stemming of blood, by
healing of Horse-crooks, by turning of the riddle, or doing of such like
innumerable things by words, without applying any thing, meet to the
part offended, as Doctors do; Or else by staying married folks, to
have naturally ado with other, (by knitting so many knots upon a
point at the time of their marriage). And such-like things, which men uses
to practice in their merriness: For from unlearned men (being naturally
curious, and lacking the true knowledge of God) finds these practices to
prove true, as sundry of them will do, by the power of the Devil for
deceiving men, and not by any inherent virtue in these vain words and
omens; and being desirous to winn a reputation to themselves in such-like
turns, they either (if they be of the more shamefaced sort) seek to be
learned by some that are experimented in that Art, (not knowing it to be
evil at the first) or else being of the grosser sort, runs directly
to the Devil for ambition or desire of gain, and plainly contracts
with him thereupon.

PHI. But me thinks these means which you call the School and rudiments
of the Devil, are things lawful, and have been approved for such in
all times and ages: As in special, this science of _Astrology_, which is
one of the special members of the _Mathematics_.

EPI. There are two things which the learned have observed from the
beginning, in the science of the Heavenly Creatures, the Planets,
Stars, and such like: The one is their course and ordinary motions,
which for that cause is called _Astronomia_: Which word is a compound of
νομος and αστερων that is to say, the law of the Stars: And this art
indeed is one of the members of the _Mathematics_, and not only lawful,
but most necessary and commendable. The other is called _Astrologia_,
being compounded of αστερων and λογος which is to say, the word, and
preaching of the stars: Which is divided in two parts: The first by
knowing thereby the powers of simples, and sicknesses, the course of the
seasons and the weather, being ruled by their influence; which part
depending upon the former, although it be not of itself a part of
_Mathematics_: yet it is not unlawful, being moderately used, suppose
not so necessary and commendable as the former. The second part is to
trust so much to their influences, as thereby to fore-tell what
commonwealths shall flourish or decay: what persons shall be fortunate or
unfortunate: what side shall winn in any battle: What man shall obtain
victory at singular combat: What way, and of what age shall men die:
What horse shall winn at racing; and diverse such like incredible
things, wherein _Cardanus_, _Cornelius Agrippa_, and diverse others have
more curiously then profitably written at large. Of this root last
spoken of, springs innumerable branches; such as the knowledge by the
nativities; the _Chiromancy_, _Geomancy_, _Hydromancy_, _Arithmancy_,
_Physiognomy_: and a thousand others: which were much practised, and holden
in great reverence by the _Gentlefolk_ of old. And this last part of
_Astrology_ whereof I have spoken, which is the root of their branches,
was called by them _pars fortune_. This part now is utterly unlawful to
be trusted in, or practiced amongst christians, as leaning to no ground of
natural reason: and it is this part which I called before the devil's school.

PHI. But yet many of the learned are of the contrary opinion.

EPI. I grant, yet I could give my reasons to fortify and maintain my
opinion, if to enter into this disputation it would not draw me quite off
the ground of our discourse; besides the mis-spending of the whole dai
thereupon: One word only I will answer to them, and that in the Scriptures
(which must be an infallible ground to all true Christians) That in the
Prophet _Jeremiah_ (M12) it is plainly forbidden, to believe or hearken
unto them that Prophecies and fore-speaks by the course of the Planets &
Stars.




Chap. V.


ARGUMENT.

_How farr the using of Charms is lawful or unlawful: The description
of the forms of Circles and Conjurations. And what causes the_
Magicians _themselves to weary thereof_.

PHILOMATHES.

Well, You have said far enough in that argument. But how prove you now that
these charms or unnatural practices are unlawful: For so, many honest
& merry men and women have publicly practiced some of them, that I think
if you would accuse them all of Witchcraft, you would affirm more than you
will be believed in.

EPI. I see if you had taken good tent (to the nature of that word, whereby
I named it,) you would not have been in this doubt, nor mistaken me, so
farr as you have done: For although, as none can be scholars in a school,
& not be subject to the master thereof: so none can study and put in
practice (for study the alone, and knowledge, is more perilous than
offensive; and it is the practice only that makes the greatness of the
offence.) the circles and art of _Magic_, without committing an horrible
defection from God: And yet as they that reads and learns their
rudiments, are not the more subject to any schoolmaster, if it please
not their parents to put them to the school thereafter; So they who
ignorantly proves these practices, which I cal the devil's rudiments,
unknowing them to be baits, cast out by him, for trapping such as God
will permit to fall in his hands: This kind of folks I say, no doubt,
are to be judged the best of, in respect they use no invocation nor help of
him (by their knowledge at least) in these turns, and so have never
entered themselves in Satan's service; Yet to speak truly for my own
part (I speak but for myself) I desire not to make so near riding: For
in my opinion our enemy is over crafty, and we over weak (except the
greater grace of God) to assay such hazards, wherein he presses to trap
us.

PHI. You have reason indeed; for as the common Proverb says: They that
supp broth with the Devil, have need of long spoons. But now I pray
you go forward in the describing of this art of _Magic_.

EPI. From they be come once unto this perfection in evil, in having any
knowledge (whether learned or unlearned) of this black art: they then
begin to be weary of the raising of their Master, by conjured
circles; being both so difficult and perilous, and so comes plainly
to a contract with him, wherein is especially contained forms and
effects.

PHI. But I pray you or ever you go further, discourse me some-what of
their circles and conjurations; And what should be the cause of their
wearying thereof: For it should seem that that form should be less
fearful yet, than the direct haunting and society, with that foul and
unclean Spirit.

EPI. I think you take me to be a Witch myself, or at the least would
gladly swear yourself apprentice to that craft: Always as I may, I shall
shortly satisfy you, in that kind of conjurations, which are contained
in such books, which I call the Devil's School: There are four
principal parts; the persons of the conjurers; the action of the
conjuration; the words and rites used to that effect; and the Spirits
that are conjured. You must first remember to lay the ground, that I told
you before: which is, that it is no power inherent in the circles, or in
the holiness of the names of God blasphemously used: nor in whatsoever
rites or ceremonies at that time used, that either can raise any infernal
spirit, or yet limited him perforce within or without these circles. For
it is he only, the father of all lies, who having first of all
prescribed that form of doing, feigning himself to be commanded &
restrained thereby, will be loath to pass the bounds of these
injunctions; as well thereby to make them glory in the rule over him
(as I said before:) As likewise to make himself so to be trusted in
these little things, that he may have the better commodity thereafter,
to deceive them in the end with a trick once for all; I mean the
everlasting perdition of their soul and body. Then laying this ground, as I
have said, these conjurations must have few or more in number of the
persons conjurers (always passing the singular number) according to the
quality of the circle, and form of apparition. Two principal things
cannot well in that errand be wanted: holy water (whereby the Devil
mocks the _Papists_) and some present of a living thing unto him. There
are likewise certain seasons, days and hours, that they observe in this
purpose: These things being all ready, and prepared, circles are made
triangular, quadrangular, round, double or single, according to the form
of apparition that they crave. But to speak of the diverse forms of the
circles, of the innumerable characters and crosses that are within and
without, and out-through the same, of the divers forms of apparitions,
that that crafty spirit eludes them with, and or all such particulars in
that action, I remit it to over-mani that have busied their heads in
describing of the same; as being but curious, and altogether unprofitable.
And this farr only I touch, that when the conjured Spirit appears,
which will not be while after many circumstances, long prayers, and much
muttering and murmuring of the conjurers; like a _Papist_ priest,
dispatching a hunting _Mass_: how son I say, he appears, if they have
missed one iot of all their rites; or if any of their feet once slid
over the circle through terror of his fearful apparition, he pays
himself at that time in his own hand, of that due debt which they ought
him; and other-wise would have delayed longer to have paid him: I mean
he carries them with him body and soul. If this be not now a just cause
to make them weary of these forms of conjuration, I leave it to you to
judge upon; considering the tediousness of the labour, the precise
keeping of days and hours (as I have said), the terribleness of
apparition, and the present peril that they stand in, in missing the
least circumstance or omen, that they ought to observe: And on the other
part, the Devil is glad to move them to a plain and square dealing with
him as I said before.




Chap. VI.


ARGUMENT.

_The Devil's contract with the Magicians: The division thereof in two
parts: What is the difference between God's miracles and the Devils._

PHILOMATHES.

Indeed there is cause enough, but rather to leave him at all, then to
rune more plainly to him, if they were wise he dealt with. But go
forwards now I pray you to these turns, from they become once deacons in
this craft.

EPI. From time that they once plainly begin to contract with him: The
effect of their contract consists in two things; in forms and effects,
as I began to tell already, were it not you interrupted me (for although
the contract be mutual; I speak first of that part, wherein the Devil
obliges himself to them) by forms, I mean in what shape or fashion he
shall come unto them, when they call upon him. And by effects, I
understand, in what special sorts of services he binds himself to be
subject unto them. The quality of these forms and effects, is less or
greater, according to the skill and art of the _Magician_. For as to the
forms, to some of the baser sort of them he obliges himself to
appear at their calling upon him, by such a proper name which he shows
unto them, either in likeness of a dog, a Cate, an Ape, or such-like other
beast; or else to answer by a voice only. The effects are to answer to
such demands, as concerns curing of diseases, their own particular
menagerie: or such other base things as they require of him.

But to the most curious sort, in the forms he will oblige himself, to
enter in a dead body, and there out of to give such answers, of the event
of battles, of matters concerning the estate of commonwealths, and such like
other great questions: yes, to some he will be a continual attendant, in
form of a Page: He will permit himself to be conjured, for the space of
so many years, ether in a tablet or a ring, or such like thing, which they
may easily carrie about with them: He gives them power to self such wars
to others, whereof some will be dearer, and some better cheap; according
to the lying or true speaking of the Spirit that is conjured therein. Not
but that in very deed, all Devils must be liars; but so they abuse the
simplicity of these wretches, that becomes their scholars, that they
make them believe, that at the fall of _Lucifer_, some Spirits fell in
the air, some in the fire, some in the water, some in the land: In which
Elements they still remain. Whereupon they build, that such as fell in
the fire, or in the air, are truer then they, who fell in the water or in
the land, which is all but mere chatter, and forged by the author of all
deceit. For they fell not be weight, as a solid substance, to stick in any
one part: But the principal part of their fall, consisting in quality,
by the falling from the grace of God wherein they were created, they
continued still thereafter, and shall do while the latter dai, in wandering
through the world, as God's hang-men, to execute such turns as he
employs them in. And when any of them are not occupied in that, return
they must to their prison in hell (as it is plain in the miracle that
CHRIST wrought at _Gennesaret_) (M13) therein at the latter dai to be
all enclosed for ever: and as they deceive their scholars in this, so do
they, in imprinting in them the opinion that there are so many Princes,
Dukes, and Kings amongst them, every one commanding fewer or more Legions,
and impairing in divers arts, and quarters of the earth. For though that I
will not deny that there be a form of filth amongst the Angels in
Heaven, and consequently, was amongst them before their fall; yet, either
that they enjoy the same since; or that God will permit us to know by
damned Devils, such heavenly mysteries of his, which he would not reveal
to us neither by Scripture nor Prophets, I think no Christian will once
think it. But by the contrary of all such mysteries, as he has closed
up with his seal of secrecy; it becomes us to be contented with an
humble ignorance, they being things not necessary for our salvation. But
to return to the purpose, as these forms, wherein Satan obliges
himself to the greatest of the _Magicians_, are wonderful curious; so
are the effects correspondent unto the same: For he will oblige himself
to teach them arts and sciences, which he may easily do, being so
learned a knave as he is: To carrie them news from any part of the
world, which the agility of a Spirit may easily perform: to reveal
to them the secrets of any persons, so being they be once spoken, for
the thought none knows but GOD; except so far as you may guess by their
countenance, as one who is doubtless learned, enough in the
_Physiognomy_: Yes, he will make his scholars to creep in credit with
Princes, by fore-telling them many great things; part true, part
false: For if all were false, he would tin credit at all hands; but
always doubtful, as his Oracles were. And he will also make them to
please Princes, by fair banquets and dainty dishes, carried in short
space from the farthest part of the world. For no man doubts but he is a
thief, and his agility (as I spoke before) makes him to come such
speed. Such-like, he will guard his scholars with fair armies of
horse-men and footmen in appearance, castles and forts: Which all are
but impressions in the air, easily gathered by a spirit, drawing so
near to that substance himself: As in like manner he will learn them
many jugglery tricks at Guards, dice, and such like, to deceive men's
senses thereby: and such innumerable false practices; which are proven
by over-mani in this age: As they who are acquainted with that _Italian_
called SCOTO yet living, can report. And yet are all these things but
deluding of the senses, and no ways true in substance, as were the false
miracles wrought by King _Pharaoh's_ Magicians, for counterfeiting
_Moses_: For that is the difference between God's miracles and the Devils,
God is a creator, what he makes appear in miracle, it is so in effect. As
_Moses_ rod being cast down, was no doubt turned in a natural Serpent:
where as the Devil (as Gods Ape) counterfeiting that by his _Magicians_,
maid their wands to appear so, only to men's outward senses: as
appeared in effect by their being devoured by the other. For it is no
wonder, that the Devil may delude our senses, since we see by common
proof, that simply jugglers will make an hundred things seem both to
our eis and ears otherwise then they are. Now as to the _Magicians_
part of the contract, it is in a word that thing, which I said before,
the Devil hunts for in all men.

PHI. Surely you have said much to me in this art, if all that you have
said be as true as wonderful.

EPI. For the truth in these actions, it will be easily confirmed, to
any that pleases to take pain upon the reading of diverse authentic
histories, and the inquiring of daily experiences. And as for the truth
of their possibility, that they may be, and in what manner, I trust I have
alleged nothing whereunto I have not joined such probable reasons, as I
leave to your discretion, to wai and consider: One word only I omitted;
concerning the form of making of this contract, which is either written
with the _Magicians_ own blood: or else being agreed upon (in terms his
schoolmaster) touches him in some part, though perhaps no mark
remain: as it does with all Witches.




Chap. VII.


ARGUMENT.

_The reason why the art of_ Magic _is unlawful. What punishment they
merit: And who may be accounted guilty of that crime._

PHILOMATHES.

Surely You have made this art to appear very monstrous and detestable.
But what I pray you shall be said to such as maintains this art to be
lawful, for as evil as you have made it?

EPI. I say, they savour of the pane themselves, or at least little
better, And yet I would be glad to hear their reasons.

PHI. There are two principally, that ever I heard used; beside that which
is founded upon the common Proverb (that the _Necromancers_ commands the
Devil, which you have already refuted). The one is grounded upon a
received custom: The other upon an authority, which some thinks
infallible. Upon custom, we see that diverse Christian Princes and
Magistrates severe punishers of Witches, will not only over-see
_Magicians_ to live within their dominions; but even some-times delight to
see them prove some of their practices. The other reason is, that
_Moses_ being brought up (as it is expressly said in the Scriptures) _in
all the sciences of the Egyptians_; whereof no doubt, this was one of the
principals. And he notwithstanding of this art, pleasing God, as he
did, consequently that art professed by so godly a man, could not be
unlawful.

EPI. As to the first of your reasons, grounded upon custom: I say, an
evil custom can never be accepted for a good law, for the over great
ignorance of the word in some Princes and Magistrates, and the contempt
thereof in others, moves them to sin heavily against their office in
that point. As to the other reason, which seems to be of greater weight,
if it were formed in a Syllogism; it behooved to be in many terms, and
full of fallacies (to speak in terms of _Logic_) for first, that that
general proposition; affirming _Moses_ to be taught _in all the sciences
of the Egyptians_, should conclude that he was taught in _Magic_, I see no
necessity. For we must understand that the spirit of God there, speaking
of sciences, understands them that are lawful; for except they be
lawful, they are but _abusiveè_ called sciences, and are but ignorance
indeed: _Nam homo pictus, non est homo_. Secondly, giving that he had
been taught in it, there is great difference, between knowledge and
practising of a thing (as I said before). For God knows all things,
being always good, and of our sin and our infirmity proceeds our
ignorance. Thirdly, giving that he had both studied and practised the
same (which is more than monstrous to be believed by any Christian) yet we
know well enough, that before that ever the spirit of God began to call
_Moses_, he was fled out of _Egypt_, being forty years of age, for the
slaughter of an _Egyptian_, and in his good-father _Jethro's_ land, first
called at the fiery bush, having remained there other forty years in
exile: so that suppose he had been the wicked man in the world
before, he then became a changed and regenerate man, and very little of old
_Moses_ remained in him. _Abraham_ was an Idolater in _Vr_ of
_CalledÃ¦ea_, before he was called: And _Paul_ being called _Saul_, was a
most sharp persecutor of the Saints of God, while that name was changed.

PHI. What punishment then think you merits these _Magicians_ and
_Necromancers_?

EPI. The like no doubt, that _Sorcerers_ and _Witches_ merits; and rather
so much greater, as their error proceeds of the greater knowledge, and so
draws nearer to the sin against the holy Ghost. And as I say of them, so
say I the like of all such as consults, inquires, entertains, and oversees
them, which is seen by the miserable ends of many that asks counsel of
them: For the Devil has never better tidings to tell to any, then he
told to _Saul_: neither is it lawful to use so unlawful instruments,
were it never for so good a purpose: for that axiom in Theology is most
certain and infallible: (M14) _Nunquam faciendum est malum vt bonum ind
eveniat._





SECOND BOOK.


ARGUMENT.

_The description of Sorcery and Witchcraft in special._




Chap. I.


ARGUMENT.

_Proved by the Scripture, that such a thing can be: And the reasons
refuted of all such as would call it but an imagination and Melancholic
humor._

PHILOMATHES.

Now since you have satisfied me now so fully, concerning _Magic_ or
_Necromancy_ I will pray you to do the like in _Sorcery_ or
_Witchcraft_.

EPI. That field is likewise very large: and although in the mouths and
pens of many, yet few knows the truth thereof, so well as they
believe themselves, as I shall so shortly as I can, make you (God
willing) as easily to perceive.

PHI. But I pray you before you go further, let me interrupt you here with
a short digression: which is, that many can scarcely believe that there
is such a thing as Witchcraft. Whose reasons I will shortly allege unto
you, that you may satisfy me as well in that, as you have done in the rest.
For first, whereas the Scripture seems to prove Witchcraft to be, by
diverse examples, and especially by sundry of the same, which you have
alleged, it is thought by some, that these places speaks of _Magicians_
and _Necromancers_ only, and not of Witches. As in special, these wise men
of _Pharaohs_, that counterfeited _Moses_ miracles, were _Magicians_ say
they, and not Witches: As likewise that _Pythoness_ that _Saul_ consulted
with: And so was _Simon Magus_ in the new Testament, as that very style
imports. Secondly, where you would oppose the daily practice, &
confession of so many, that is thought likewise to be but very
melancholic imaginations of simply raving creatures. Thirdly, if
Witches had such power of Witching of folks to death, (as they say they
have) there had been none left alive long sense in the world, but they: at
the least, no good or godly person of whatsoever estate, could have
escaped their devilry.

EPI. Your three reasons as I take, are grounded the first of them
_negativeè_ upon the Scripture: The second _affirmativeè_ upon Physic: And
the third upon the certain proof of experience. As to your first, it is
most true indeed, that all these wise men of _Pharaoh_ were _Magicians_
of art: As likewise it appears well that the _Pythoness_, with whom
_Saul_ consulted, was of that same profession: and so was _Simon Magus_. But
you omitted to speak of the Law of God, wherein are all _Magicians_,
Divines, Enchanters, Sorcerers, Witches, and whatsoever of that kind that
consults with the Devil, plainly prohibited, and alike threatened
against. And besides that, she who had the Spirit of _Python_, in the
Acts, (M15) whose Spirit was put to silence by the Apostle, could be no
other thing but a very Sorcerer or Witch, if you admit the vulgar
distinction, to be in a manner true, whereof I spoke in the beginning of
our conference. For that spirit whereby she conquered such gain to her
Master, was not at her raising or commanding, as she pleased to appoint,
but spoke by her tongue, as well publicly, as privately: Whereby she
seemed to draw nearer to the sort of _Demoniacs_ or possessed, if that
conjunction between them, had not been of her own consent: as it appeared
by her, not being tormented therewith: And by her conquering of such
gain to her masters (as I have already said.) As to your second reason
grounded upon Physic, in attributing their confessions or
apprehensions, to a natural melancholic humour: Any that pleases
Physically to consider upon the natural humour of melancholy, according
to all the Physicians, that ever writ thereupon, they shall find that
that will be over short a cloak to cover their knavery with: For as the
humor of Melancholy in the self is black, heavy and earthly, so are
the symptoms thereof, in any persons that are subject to it,
leans, paleness, desire of solitude: and if they come to the highest
degree thereof, mere folly and _Many_: where as by the contrary, a great
number of them that ever have been convict or confessors of Witchcraft, as
may be presently seen by many that have at this time confessed: they are
by the contrary, I say, some of them rich and worldly-wise, some of them
fate or corpulent in their bodies, and most part of them altogether given
over to the pleasures of the flesh, continual haunting of company, and
all kind of merriness, both lawful and unlawful, which are things
directly contrary to the symptoms of Melancholy, whereof I spoke, and
further experience daily proves how loath they are to confess without
torture, which witnesses their guiltiness, where by the contrary, the
Melancholic never spares to betray themselves, by their continual
discourses, feeding thereby their humor in that which they think no crime.
As to your third reason, it scarcely merits an answer. For if the
devil their master were not bridled, as the scriptures teaches us,
suppose there were no men nor women to be his instruments, he could find
ways enough without any help of others to wreck all mankind: to which
he employs his whole study, and _goes about like a roaring Lyon_ (as
PETER says) (M16) to that effect, but the limits of his power were set
down before the foundations of the world were laid, which he has not
power in the least jot to transgress. But beside all this, there is over
great a certainty to prove that they are, by the daily experience of the
harms that they do, both to men, and whatsoever thing men possesses,
whom God will permit them to be the instruments, so to trouble or
visit, as in my discourse of that art, you shall hear clearly proved.




Chap. II.


ARGUMENT.

_The Etymology and signification of that word of_ Sorcery. _The first
entrance and apprenticeship of them that gives themselves to that craft._

PHILOMATHES.

Come on then I pray you, and return where you left.

EPI. This word of _Sorcery_ is a _Latin_ word, which is taken from
casting of the lot, and therefore he that uses it, is called _Sortiarius à
sort_. As to the word of _Witchcraft_, it is nothing but a proper name
given in our language. The cause wherefore they were called _sortiarij_,
proceeded of their practices seeming to come of lot or chance: Such as
the turning of the riddle: the knowing of the form of prayers, or such
like tokens: If a person diseased would live or dye. And in general,
that name was given them for using of such charms, and omens, as that
Craft teaches them. Many points of their craft and practices are
common between the _Magicians_ and them: for they serve both one Master,
although in diverse fashions. And as I divided the _Necromancers_, into
two sorts, learned and unlearned; so must I deny them in other two, rich
and of better account, poor and of meaner degree. These two degrees now
of persons, that practices this craft, answers to the passions in them,
which (I told you before) the Devil used as means to entice them to his
service, for such of them as are in great misery and poverty, he allures
to follow him, by promising unto them great riches, and worldly
commodity. Such as though rich, yet burns in a desperate desire of
revenge, he allures them by promises, to get their turn satisfied to
their hearts contentment. It is to be noted now, that that old and
crafty enemy of ours, assails none, though touched with any of these
two extremities, except he first find an entrance ready for him, either
by the great ignorance of the person he deals with, joined with an evil
life, or else by their carelessness and contempt of God: And finding them in
an utter despair, for one of these two former causes that I have spoken
of; he prepares the way by feeding them craftily in their humour, and
filling them further and further with despair, while he find the time
proper to discover himself unto them. At which time, either upon their
walking solitary in the fields, or else lying pondering in their bed; but
always without the company of any other, he either by a voice, or in
likeness of a man inquires of them, what troubles them: and promises
them, a sudden and certain wai of remedy, upon condition on the other
part, that they follow his advise; and do such things as he will require
of them: Their minds being prepared before hand, as I have already
spoken, they easily agreed unto that demand of his: And then sets an
other tryst, where they may meet again. At which time, before he
proceed any further with them, he first persuades them to addict
themselves to his service: which being easily obtained, he then discovers
what he is unto them: makes them to renounce their God and _Baptism_
directly, and gives them his mark upon some secret place of their
body, which remains soar unhealed, while his next meeting with them,
and thereafter ever insensible, how soever it be nipped or priced by any,
as is daily proved, to give them a proof thereby, that as in that doing,
he could hurt and heal them; so all their ill and well doing
thereafter, must depend upon him. And besides that, the intolerable
grief that they feel in that place, where he has marked them, serves to
waken them, and not to let them rest, while their next meeting again:
fearing least otherwise they might either forget him, being as new
Apprentices, and not well enough founded yet, in that fiendish folly: or
else remembering of that horrible promise they made him, at their last
meeting, they might shun at the same, and press to call it back. At
their third meeting, he makes a show to be careful to perform his
promises, either by teaching them ways how to get themselves revenged,
if they be of that sort: Or else by teaching them lessons, how by most
vile and unlawful means, they may obtain gain, and worldly
commodity, if they be of the other sort.




Chap. III.


ARGUMENT.

_The_ Witches _actions divided in two parts. The actions proper to
their own persons. Their actions toward others. The form of their
conventions, and adoring of their Master._

PHILOMATHES.

You have said now enough of their initiating in that filth. It rests then
that you discourse upon their practices, from they be passed Apprentices: for
I would gladly hear what is possible to them to perform in very deed.
Although they serve a common Master with the _Necromancers_, (as I have
before said) yet serve they him in an other form. For as the means are
diverse, which allures them to these unlawful arts of serving of the
Devil; so by diverse ways use they their practices, answering to these
means, which first the Devil, used as instruments in them; though all
tending to one end: To wit, the enlarging of Satan's tyranny, and
crossing of the propagation of the Kingdom of CHRIST, so farr as lis
in the possibility, either of the one or other sort, or of the Devil
their Master. For where the _Magicians_, as allured by curiosity, in the
most part of their practices, seeks principally the satisfying of the
same, and to winn to themselves a popular honour and estimation: These
Witches on the other part, being enticed ether for the desire of revenge,
or of worldly riches, their whole practices are either to hurt men and
their goods, or what they possess, for satisfying of their cruel minds
in the former, or else by the wreck in whatsoever sort, of any whom
God will permit them to have power off, to satisfy their greedy desire
in the last point.

EPI. In two parts their actions may be divided; the actions of their
own persons, and the actions proceeding from them towards any other.
And this division being well understood, will easily resolve you, what is
possible to them to do. For although all that they confess is no lie
upon their part, yet doubtless in my opinion, a part of it is not
indeed, according as they take it to be: And in this I mean by the
actions of their own persons. For as I said before, speaking of _Magic_
that the Devil eludes the senses of these scholars of his, in many
things, so say I the like of these Witches.

PHI. Then I pray you, first to speak of that part of their own persons,
and then you may come next to their actions towards others.

EPI. To the effect that they may perform such services of their false
Master, as he employs them in, the devil as Gods Ape, counterfeits in
his servants this service and form of adoration, that God prescribed and
made his servants to practice. For as the servants of GOD, publicly
uses to convene for serving of him, so makes he them in great numbers to
convene (though publicly they dare not) for his service. As none
convenes to the adoration and worshiping of God, except they be marked
with his scale, the Sacrament of _Baptism_: So none serves Satan, and
convenes to the adoring of him, that are not marked with that mark,
whereof I already spoke. As the Minister sent by God, teaches plainly at
the time of their public conventions, how to serve him in spirit and truth:
so that unclean spirit, in his own person teaches his Disciples, at
the time of their convening, how to work all kind of mischief: And
craves account of all their horrible and detestable proceedings passed, for
advancement of his service. Yes, that he may the more vividly counterfeit
and scorn God, he often times makes his slaves to convene in these very
places, which are destined and ordained for the convening of the
servants of God (I mean by Churches). But this farr, which I have yet
said, I not only take it to be true in their opinions, but even so to
be indeed. For the form that he used in counterfeiting God amongst the
_Gentiles_, makes me so to think: As God spoke by his Oracles, spoke he
not so by his? As GOD had as well bloody Sacrifices, as others without
blood, had not he the like? As God had Churches sanctified to his service,
with Altars, Priests, Sacrifices, Ceremonies and Prayers; had he not the
like polluted to his service? As God gave responses by _Urim_ and
_Thummim_, gave he not his responses by the entrails of beasts, by the
singing of Fowls, and by their actions in the air? As God by visions,
dreams, and ecstasies revealed what was to come, and what was his will unto
his servants; used he not the like means to forewarn his slaves of
things to come? Yes, even as God loved cleans, hated vice, and
impurity, and appointed punishments therefore: used he not the like
(though falsely I grant, and but in eschewing the less inconvenient, to
draw them upon a greater) yet dissembled he not I say, so farr as to
appoint his Priests to keep their bodies clean and undefiled, before
their asking responses of him? And feigned he not God to be a protector of
every virtue, and a just revenger of the contrary? This reason then
moves me, that as he is that same Devil; and as crafty now as he was
then; so will he not spare a openly in these actions that I have spoken
of, concerning the witches persons: But further, Witches often times
confesses not only his convening in the Church with them, but his
occupying of the Pulpit: Yes, their form of adoration, to be the kissing
of his hinder parts. Which though it seem ridiculous, yet may it
likewise be true, seeing we read that in _Calicut_, he appearing in
form of a _Goat_-buck, has publicly that vn-hon homage done unto
him, by every one of the people: So ambitious is he, and greedy of
honour (which procured his fall) that he will even imitate God in that
part, (M17) where it is said, that _Moses_ could see but the _hinder
parts of God, for the brightness of his glory_: And yet that speech is
spoken but ανθρωπωπαθειαν.




Chap. IIII.


ARGUMENT.

_What are the ways possible, whereby the witches may transport themselves
to places far distant, And what are impossible and mere illusions of Satan.
And the reasons thereof._

PHILOMATHES.

But by what way say they or think you it possible that they can com to
these unlawful cõuentiõs?

EPI. There is the thing which I esteem their senses to be deluded in, and
though they ly not in confessing of it, because they think it to be
true, yet not to be so in substance or effect: for they say, that by
diverse means they may convene, either to the adoring of their Master,
or to the putting in practice any service of his, committed unto their
charge: one way is natural, which is natural riding, going or sailing, at
what hour their Master comes and advertises them. And this way may be
easily believed: an other way is some-what more strange: and yet is it
possible to be true: which is by being carried by the force of the Spirit
which is their conductor, either above the earth or above the Sea
swiftly, to the place where they are to meet: which I am persuaded to be
likewise possible, in respect that as _Habakkuk_ was carried by the
Angel in that form, to the den where _Daniel_ lai; (M18) so think
I, the Devil will be reddy to imitate God, as well in that as in other
things: which is much more possible to him to do, being a Spirit, then
to a mighty wind, being but a natural meteor, to transport from one
place to an other a solid body, as is commonly and daily seen in
practice: But in this violent form they cannot be carried, but a short
bounds, agreeing with the space that they may retain their breath: for
if it were longer, their breath could not remain unextinguished, their
body being carried in such a violent and forcible manner, as be example: If
one fall off an small height, his life is but in peril, according to the
hard or soft lighting: But if one fall from an high and stay rock, his
breath will be forcibly banished from the body, before he can win to the
earth, as is often seen by experience. And in this transporting they say
themselves, that they are invisible to any other, except amongst
themselves; which may also be possible in my opinion. For if the devil may
form what kind of impressions he pleases in the air, as I have said
before, speaking of _Magic_, why may he not far easier thicken and obscure
so the air, that is next about them by contracting it strait together,
that the beams of any other mans eyes, cannot pearce through the same, to
see them? But the third way of their coming to their conventions, is,
that where in I think them deluded: for some of them says, that being
transformed in the likeness of a little beast or foul, they will come
and pearce through whatsoever house or Church, though all ordinary
passages be closed, by whatsoever open, the air may enter in at. And some
says, that their bodies lying still as in an ecstasy, their spirits will be
ravished out of their bodies, and carried to such places. And for verifying
thereof, will give evident tokens, as well by witnesses that have seen their
body lying senseless in the mean time, as by naming persons, with whom
they met, and giving tokens what purpose was amongst them, whom
otherwise they could not have known: for this form of journeying, they
affirm to use most, when they are transported from one Country to
another.

PHI. Surely I long to hear your own opinion of this: For they are like
old wives chatter about the fire. The reasons that moves me to think
that these are mere illusions, are these. First for them that are
transformed in likeness of beasts or fouls, can enter through so narrow
passages, although I may easily believe that the Devil could by his
workmanship upon the air, make them appear to be in such forms,
either to themselves or to others: Yet how he can contract a solid body
within so little room, I think it is directly contrary to itself,
for to be made so little, and yet not diminished: To be so strictly
drawn together, and yet feel no pain; I think it is so contrary to
the quality of a natural body, and so like to the little
transubstantiated god in the _Papists Mass_, that I can never believe it.
So to have a quantity, is so proper to a solid body, that as all
Philosophers conclude, it cannot be any more without one, then a spirit
can have one. For when PETER _came out of the prison, _(_M19_)_ and the
doors all locked_: It was not by any contracting of his body in so
little room: but by the giving place of the dor, though unnoticed by the
Jailers. And yet is there no comparison, when this is done, between the
power of God, and of the Devil. As to their form of ecstasy and
spiritual transporting, it is certain the souls going out of the body,
is the only definition of natural death: and who are once dead, God
forbid we should think that it should lie in the power of all the Devils
in Hell, to restore them to their life again: Although he can put his
own spirit in a dead body, which the _Necromancers_ commonly practice,
as you have hard. For that is the office properly belonging to God; and
besides that, the soul once parting from the body, cannot wander any
longer in the world, but to the own resting place must it go
immediately, abiding the conjunction of the body again, at the latter
dai. And what CHRIST or the Prophets did miraculously in this case, it
cannot in no Christian mans opinion be maid common with the Devil. As for
any tokens that they give for proving of this, it is very possible to
the Devil's craft, to persuade them to these means. For he being a
spirit, may he not so ravish their thoughts, and dull their senses,
that their body lying as dead, he may object to their spirits as it
were in a dream, and (as the Poets write of _Morpheus_) represent such
forms of persons, of places, and other circumstances, as he pleases to
elude them with? Yes, that he may deceive them with the greater
efficacy, may he not at that same instant, by fellow angeles of his,
elude such other persons so in that same fashion, whom with he makes
them to believe that they met; that all their reports and tokens,
though severally examined, may every one agree with an other. And that
whatsoever actions, either in hurting men or beasts: or whatsoever other
thing that they falsely imagine, at that time to have done, may by
himself or his marrows, at that same time be done indeed; so as if they
would give for a token of their being ravished at the death of such a
person within so short space thereafter, whom they believe to have
poisoned, or bewitched at that instant, might he not at that same hour,
have smitten that same person by the permission of GOD, to the farther
deceiving of them, and to move others to believe them? And this is
surely the likely way, and most according to reason, which my
judgment can find out in this, and whatsoever other unnatural points
of their confession. And by these means shall we sail surely, between
_Charybdis_ and _Scylla_, in eschewing the not believing of them
altogether on the one part, least that draw us to the error that there
is no Witches: and on the other part in believing of it, make us to
eschew the falling into innumerable absurdities, both monstrously
against all Theology divine, and Philosophy human.




Chap. V.


ARGUMENT.

_Witches actions towards others. Why there are more women of that craft
than men? What things are possible to them to effectuate by the power of
their master. The reasons thereof. What is the sur remedy of the
harms done by them._

PHILOMATHES.

Indeed your opinion in this, seems to carrie most reason with it, and
sense you have ended, then the actions belonging properly to their own
persons: say forward now to their actions used towards others.

EPI. In their actions used towards others, three things ought to be
considered: First the manner of their consulting thereupon: Next their part
as instruments: And last their masters part, who puts the same in
execution. As to their consultations thereupon, they use them oft in
the Churches, where they convene for adoring: at what time their master
inquiring at them what they would be at: every one of them proposes unto
him, what wicked turn they would have done, either for obtaining of
riches, or for revenging them upon any whom they have malice at: who
granting their demand, as no doubt willingly he will, since it is to do
evil, he teaches them the means, whereby they may do the same. As for
little trifling turns that women have ado with, he causes them to joint
dead corpses, and to make powders thereof, mixing such other things there
amongst, as he gives unto them.

PHI. But before you go further, permit me I pray you to interrupt you
one word, which you have put me in memory of, by speaking of Women.
What can be the cause that there are twenty women given to that craft,
where there is one man?

EPI. The reason is easy, for as that sex is frailer then man is, so is
it easier to be entrapped in these gross snares of the Devil, as was
over well proved to be true, by the Serpents deceiving of _Eva_ at the
beginning, which makes him the homelier with that sex since.

PHI. Return now where you left.

EPI. To some others at these times he teaches how to make Pictures of
wax or clay: That by the roasting thereof, the persons that they bear
the name of, may be continually melted or dried away by continual
sickness. To some he gives such stones or powders, as will help to
cure or cast on diseases: And to some he teaches kinds of uncouth
poisons, which Doctors understands not (for he is farr more cunning
then man in the knowledge of all the occult properties of nature) not
that any of these means which he teaches them (except the poisons
which are composed of things natural) can of themselves help any thing
to these turns, that they are employed in, but only being Gods Ape, as
well in that, as in all other things. Even as God by his Sacraments
which are earthly of themselves works a heavenly effect, though no
ways by any cooperation in them: And (M20) as CHRIST by clay and spittle
wrought together, _opened the eis of the blind man_, suppose there was no
virtue in that which he outwardly applied, so the Devil will have his
out-ward means to be shows as it were of his doing, which has no part
of cooperation in his turns with him, how farr that ever the ignorant
be abused in the contrary. And as to the effects of these two former
parts, to wit, the consultations and the outward means, they are so
wonderful as I dare not allege any of them, without joining a
sufficient reason of the possibility thereof. For leaving all the small
trifles among wives, and to speak of the principal points of their
craft. For the common trifles thereof, they can do without converting well
enough by themselves: These principal points I say are these: They can
make men or women to love or hate other, which may be very possible to
the Devil to effectual, seeing he being a subtle spirit, knows well
enough how to persuade the corrupted affection of them whom God will
permit him so to deal with: They can lay the sickness of one upon an
other, which likewise is very possible unto him: For since by Gods
permission, he laid sickness upon JOB, why may he not farr easier lay
it upon any other: For as an old practitioner, he knows well enough what
humor dominates most in any of us, and as a spirit he can subtly
walk up the same, making it sinful, or to abound, as he thinks meet
for troubling of us, when God will so permit him. And for the taking off
of it, no doubt he will be glad to relive such of present pain, as he may
think by these means to persuade to be caught in his everlasting
snares and fetters. They can be-witch and take the life of men or women,
by roasting of the Pictures, as I spoke of before, which likewise is very
possible to their Master to perform, for although, (as I said before)
that instrument of wax have no virtue in that turn doing, yet may he
not very well even by that same measure that his conjured slaves melts
that wax at the fire, may he not I say at these same times, subtly as a
spirit so weaken and scatter the spirits of life of the patient, as may
make him on th’one part, for faintness to sweat out the humour of his
body: And on the other part, for the not concurrence of these spirits,
which causes his digestion, so debilitated his stomach, that his humour
radical continually, sweating out on the one part, and no new good suck
being put in the place thereof, for lack of digestion on the other, he at
last shall vanish away, even as his picture will do at the fire. And
that knavish and cunning workman, by troubling him only at some times,
makes a proportion so near between the working of the one and the other,
that both shall end as it were at one time. They can rays storms and
tempests in the air, either upon Sea or land, though not universally,
but in such a particular place and prescribed bounds, as God will
permit them so to trouble: Which likewise is very easy to be discerned
from any other natural tempests that are meteors, in respect of the
sudden and violent raising thereof, together with the short enduring of
the same. And this is likewise very possible to their master to do, he
having such affinity with the air as being a spirit, and having such
power of the forming and moving thereof, as you have heard me already
declare: For in the Scripture, that style of _the Prince of the air_
(M21) is given unto him. They can make folks to become frenzied or
Maniac, which likewise is very possible to their master to do, sense
they are but natural sickness: and so he may lay on these kinds,
as well as any others. They can make spirits either to follow and trouble
persons, or haunt certain houses, and afraid oftentimes the
inhabitants: as has been known to be done by our Witches at this time.
And likewise they can make some to be possessed with spirits, and so to
become very Demoniacs: and this last sort is very possible likewise
to the Devil their Master to do, since he may easily send his own
angels to trouble in what form he pleases, any whom God will permit him
so to use.

PHI. But will God permit these wicked instruments by the power of the
Devil their master, to trouble by any of these means, any that
believes in him?

EPI. No doubt, for there are three kind of folks whom God will permit so
to be tempted or troubled; the wicked for their horrible sins, to punish
them in the like measure; The godly that are sleeping in any great
sins or infirmities and weakens in faith, to waken them up the faster
by such an uncouth form: and even some of the best, that their patience
may be tried before the world, as JOB'S was. For why may not God use any
kind of extraordinary punishment, when it pleases him; as well as the
ordinary rods of sickness or other adversities.

PHI. Who then may be free from these Devilish practices?

EPI. No man ought to presume so far as to promise any impunity to
himself: for God has before all beginnings preordained as well the
particular sorts of Plagues as of benefits for every man, which in the
own time he ordains them to be visited with, and yet ought we not to be
the more afraid for that, of any thing that the Devil and his wicked
instruments can do against us: For we daily fight against the Devil in
a hundred other ways: And therefore as a valiant Captain, frightens no
more being at the combat, than stays from his purpose for the rumbling
shot of a Cannon, nor the small clack of a Pistol: suppose he be not
certain what may light upon him; Even so ought we boldly to go forward
in fighting against the Devil without any greater terror, for these his
rare weapons, than for the ordinary whereof we have daily the proof.

PHI. Is it not lawful then by the help of some other Witch to cure the
disease that is cast on by that craft?

EPI. No ways lawful: For I gave you the reason thereof in that axiom of
Theology, which was the last words I spoke of _Magic_.

PHI. How then may these diseases be lawfully cured?

EPI. Only by earnest prayer to GOD, by amendment of their lives, and by
sharp pursuing every one, according to his calling of these instruments
of Satan, whose punishment to the death will be a salutary sacrifice for
the patient. And this is not only the lawful way, but likewise the most
sure: For by the Devil's means, _can never the Devil be cast out_,
(M22) as Christ says. And when such a cure is used, it may well serve for
a short time, but at the last, it will doubtless tend to the utter
perdition of the patient, both in body and soul.




Chap. VI.


ARGUMENT.

_What sort of folks are least or most subject to receive harm by
Witchcraft. What power they have to harm the Magistrate, and upon what
respects they have any power in prison: And to what end may or will the
Devil appear to them therein. Upon what respects the Devil appears in
sundry shapes to sundry of them at any time._

PHILOMATHES.

But who dare take upon him to punish them, if no man can be sure to be
free from their unnatural invasions?

EPI. We ought not the more of that restrain from virtue, that the way
whereby we climb to it be straight and perilous. But besides that, as
there is no kind of persons so subject to receive harm of them, as
these that are of infirm and weak faith (which is the best buckler
against such invasions:) so have they so small power over none, as over
such as zealously and earnestly pursues them, without sparing for any
worldly respect.

PHI. Then they are like the Pest, which strikes these sickest, that flies
it farthest, and apprehends deeply the peril thereof.

EPI. It is even so with them: For neither is it able to them to use any
false cure upon a patient, except the patient first believe in their
power, and so hazard the loss of his own soul, nor yet can they have
less power to hurt any, than such as despises most their doings, so
being it comes of faith, and not of any vain arrogance in themselves.

PHI. But what is their power against the Magistrate?

EPI. Less or greater, according as he deals with them. For if he be
slothful towards them, God is very able to make them instruments to
waken and punish his sloth. But if he be the contrary, he according to the
just law of God, and allowable law of all Nations, will be diligent in
examining and punishing of them: GOD will not permit their master to
trouble or hinder so good a work.

PHI. But from they be once in hands and assurance, have they any further
power in their craft?

EPI. That is according to the form of their detention. If they be but
apprehended and detained by any private person, upon other private
respects, their power no doubt either in escaping, or in doing hurt, is
no less than ever it was before. But if on the other part, their
apprehending and detention be by the lawful Magistrate, upon the just
respects of their guiltiness in that craft, their power is then no
greater then before that ever they meddled with their master. For where God
begins justly to strike by his lawful Lieutenants, it is not in the
Devil's power to defraud or bereave him of the office, or effect of his
powerful and revenging Scepter.

PHI. But will never their master come to visit them, from they be once
apprehended and put in assurance?

EPI. That is according to the estate that these miserable wretches are
in: For if they be obstinate in still denying, he will not spare, when he
finds time to speak with them, either if he find them in any comfort,
to fill them more and more with the vain hope of some manner of relief:
or else if he find them in a deep despair, by all means to augment
the same, and to persuade them by some extraordinary means to put
themselves down, which very commonly they do. But if they be penitent
and confess, God will not permit him to trouble them any more with his
presence and enticements.

PHI. It is not good using his counsel I see then. But I would earnestly
know when he appears to them in Prison, what forms uses he then to take?

EPI. Divers forms, even as he uses to do at other times unto them. For as
I told you, speaking of _Magic_, he appears to that kind of craftsmen
ordinarily in an form, according as they agree upon it amongst
themselves: Or if they be but apprentices, according to the quality of
their circles or conjurations: Yet to these capped creatures, he appears
as he pleases, and as he finds meet for their humors. For even at
their public conventions, he appears to divers of them in divers
forms, as we have found by the difference of their confessions in that
point: For he deluding them with vain impressions in the air, makes
himself to seem more terrible to the grosser sort, that they may
thereby be moved to fear and reverence him the more: And les monstrous
and strange again to the craftier sort, least otherwise they might
stir and shun at his ugliness.

PHI. How can he then be felt, as they confess they have done him, if his
body be but of air?

EPI. I hear little of that amongst their confessions, yet may he make
himself palpable, either by assuming any dead body, and using the
ministry thereof, or else by deluding as well their sense of feeling as
seeing; which is not impossible to him to do, since all our senses, as we
are so weak, and even by ordinary sickness will be often times
deluded.

PHI. But I would sphere one word further yet, concerning his appearing to
them in prison, which is this. May any other that chances to be present at
that time in the prison, see him as well as they.

EPI. Some-times they will, and some-times not, as it pleases God.




Chap. VII.


ARGUMENT.

_Two forms of the devils' visible conversing in the earth, with the
reasons wherefore the one of them was commune in the time of Popery:
And the other since. Those that denies the power of the Devil, denies
the power of God, and are guilty of the error of the Sadducees._

PHILOMATHES.

Has the Devil then power to appear to any other, except to such as are
his sworn disciples: especially since all Oracles, and such like kinds of
illusions were taken away and abolished by the cumming of CHRIST?

EPI. Although it be true indeed, that the brightness of the Gospel at
his cumming, scaled the clouds of all these gross errors in the
Paganism: yet that these abusing spirits, ceases not since at
sometimes to appear, daily experience teaches us. Indeed this
difference is to be marked between the forms of Satan's conversing
visibly in the world. For of two different forms thereof, the one of
them by the spreading of the Gospel, and conquest of the white horse, in
the sixth Chapter of the Revelation, is much hindered and become rarer there
through. This his appearing to any Christians, troubling of them
outwardly, or possessing of them reluctantly. The other of them is
become commoner and more used since, I mean by their unlawful arts,
whereupon our whole purpose has been. This we find by experience in this
I'll to be true. For as we know, more Ghosts and spirits were seen, than
tongue can tell, in the time of blind _Popery_ in these Countries,
where now by the contrary, a man shall scarcely all his time here once of
such things. And yet were these unlawful arts farr rarer at that time:
and never were so much hard of, than so rife as they are now.

PHI. What should be the cause of that?

EPI. The diverse nature of our sins procures at the Justice of God,
diverse sorts of punishments answering to it. And therefore as in the
time of _Popery_, our fathers erring grossly, and through ignorance,
that mist of errors overshadowed the Devil to walk the more
familiarly amongst them: And as it were by plainly and frightening
terrors, to mock and accuse their plainly errors. By the contrary,
we now being sound of Religion, and in our life rebelling to our
profession, God justly by that sin of rebellion, as _Samuel_ calls
it, accuses our life so willfully fighting against our profession.

PHI. Since you are entered now to speak of the appearing of spirits: I
would be glad to hear your opinion in that matter. For many denies that
any such spirits can appear in these days as I have said.

EPI. Doubtless who denis the power of the Devil, would likewise
deny the power of God, if they could for shame. For since the Devil is
the very contrary opposite to God, there can be no better way to know
God, then by the contrary; as by the ones power (though a creature) to
admire the power of the great Creator: by the falsehood of the one to
consider the truth of the other, by the injustice of the one, to
consider the Justice of the other: And by the cruelty of the one, to
consider the mercifulness of the other: And so forth in all the rest of
the essence of God, and qualities of the Devil. But I fear indeed,
there be over many _Sadducees_ in this world, that denies all kinds of
spirits: For convicting of whose error, there is cause enough if there
were no more, that God should permit at sometimes spirits visibly to
show.





THIRD BOOK.


ARGUMENT.

_The description of all these kinds of Spirits that troubles men or
women. The conclusion of the whole Dialogue._




Chap. I.


ARGUMENT.

_The division of spirits in four principal kinds. The description of
the first kind of them, called __Spectra and umbrae mortuorum__. What is the
best way to be free of their trouble._

PHILOMATHES.

I pray you now then go forward in telling what you think fabulous, or may
be believed in that case.

EPI. That kind of the Devils' conversing in the earth, may be divided in
four different kinds, whereby he frightens and troubles the bodies of
men: For of the abusing of the soul, I have spoken already. The first
is, where spirits troubles some houses or solitary places: The second,
where spirits follows upon certain persons, and at divers hours
troubles them: The third, when they enter within them and possess them:
The fourth is these kind of spirits that are called commonly the
Fairy. Of the three former kinds, you hard already, how they may
artificially be made by Witchcraft to trouble folk: Now it rests to
speak of their natural coming as it were, and not raised by
Witchcraft. But generally I must for-warn you of one thing before I
enter in this purpose: that is, that although in my discoursing of them,
I divide them in divers kinds, you must notwithstanding there of note my
Phrase of speaking in that: For doubtless they are in effect, but all
one kind of spirits, who for abusing the more of mankind, takes on
these sundry shapes, and uses diverse forms of out-ward actions, as if
some were of nature better then other. Now I return to my purpose: As to
the first kind of these spirits, that were called by the ancients by
divers names, according as their actions were. For if they were spirits
that haunted some houses, by appearing in divers and horrible forms, and
making great dine: they were called _Lemures_ or _Spectra_. If they
appeared in likeness of any defunct to some friends of his, they were
called _umbrae mortuorum_: And so innumerable stiles they got, according to
their actions, as I have said already. As we see by experience, how
many stiles they have given them in our language in the like manner: Of
the appearing of these spirits, we are certified by the Scriptures,
where the Prophet ISAIAH 13. (M23) and 34. cap. threatening the destruction
of _Babel_ and _Edom_: declares, that it shall not only be wrecked, but
shall become so great a solitude, as it shall be the dwelling of
Owlets, and of ZIIM and IIM, which are the proper Hebrew names for
these Spirits. The cause why they haunt solitary places, it is by
reason, that they may afraid and brawl the more the faith of such as
them alone haunts such places. For our nature is such, as in companies
we are not so soon moved to any such kind of fear, as being
solitary, which the Devil knowing well enough, he will not therefore
assail us but when we are weak: And besides that, GOD will not permit
him so to dishonor the societies and companies of Christians, as in
public times and places to walk visibly amongst them. On the other
part, when he troubles certain houses that are dwelt in, it is a sure
token either of gross ignorance, or of some gross and slanderous sins
amongst the inhabitants thereof: which God by that extraordinary rod
punishes.

PHI. But by what way or passage can these Spirits enter in these houses,
seeing they allege that they will enter, Door and Window being shut?

EPI. They will choose the passage for their entrance, according to the
form that they are in at that time. For if they have assumed a dead
body, into which they lodge themselves, they can easily enough open
without dine any Door or Window, and enter in thereat. And if they
enter as a spirit only, any place where the air may come in at, is
large enough an entry for them: For as I said before, a spirit can
occupy no quantity.

PHI. And will God then permit these wicked spirits to trouble the rest
of a dead body, before the resurrection thereof? Or if he will so, I
think it should be of the reprobate only.

EPI. What more is the rest troubled of a dead body, when the Devil
carries it out of the Grave to serve his turn for a space, nor when the
Witches takes it up and joints it, or when as Swine herbs vp the
graves? The rest of them that the Scripture speaks of, is not meant by a
local remaining continually in one place, but by their resting from
their travels and miseries of this world, while their latter
conjunction again with the soul at that time to receive full glory in
both. And that the Devil may use as well the ministry of the bodies of
the faithful in these cases, as of the vn-faithful, there is no
inconvenient; for his haunting with their bodies after they are dead, can
no-ways defile them: In respect of the souls absence. And for any
dishonor it can be unto them, by what reason can it be greater, then the
hanging, heading, or many such shameful deaths, that good men will suffer?
for there is nothing in the bodies of the faithful, more worthy of
honour, or freer from corruption by nature, than in these of the
unfaithful, while time they be purged and glorified in the latter dai, as
is daily seen by the vile diseases and corruptions, that the bodies of
the faithful are subject unto, as you will see clearly proved, when I
speak of the possessed and Demoniacs.

PHI. Yet there are sundry that affirms to have haunted such places,
where these spirits are alleged to be: And could never hear nor see
any thing.

EPI. I think well: For that is only reserved to the secrete knowledge
of God, whom he will permit to see such things, and whom not.

PHI. But where these spirits haunts and troubles any houses, what is
the best wai to banish them?

EPI. By two means may only the remedy of such things be procured: The
one is ardent prayer to God, both of these persons that are troubled with
them, and of that Church whereof they are. The other is the purging of
themselves by amendment of life from such sins, as have procured that
extraordinary plague.

PHI. And what means then these kinds of spirits, when they appear in
the shadow of a person newly dead, or to die, to his friends?

EPI. When they appear upon that occasion, they are called Wraiths in our
language. Amongst the _Gentiles_ the Devil used that much, to make them
believe that it was some good spirit that appeared to them then, ether to
forewarn them of the death of their friend; or else to discover unto
them, the will of the defunct, or what was the way of his slaughter, as is
written in the book of the histories Prodigious. And this way he easily
deceived the _Gentiles_, because they knew not God: And to that same
effect is it, that he now appears in that manner to some ignorant
Christians. For he dare not so elude any that knows that, neither can
the spirit of the defunct return to his friend, or yet an Angel use
such forms.

PHI. And are not our werewolves one sort of these spirits also, that
haunts and troubles some houses or dwelling places?

EPI. There has indeed been an old opinion of such like things; For by
the _Greeks_ they were called λυκανθρωποι which signifies werewolves.
But to tell you simply my opinion in this, if any such thing has been,
I take it to have proceeded but of a natural super-abundance of
Melancholy, which as we read, that it has made some think themselves
Pitchers, and some horses, and some one kind of beast or other: So
suppose I that it has so vitiated the imagination and memory of some, as
_per lucida intervalla_, it has so highly occupied them, that they have
thought themselves very Wolves indeed at these times: and so have
counterfeited their actions in going on their hands and feet,
pressing to devour women and barnes, fighting and snatching with all the
town dogs, and in using such like other brutish actions, and so to
become beasts by a strong apprehension, (M24) as _Nebuchadnezzar_ was
seven years: but as to their having and hiding of their hard and shelly
sloughs, I take that to be but eked, by uncertain report, the author of
all lies.




Chap. II.


ARGUMENT.

_The description of the next two kinds of Spirits, whereof the one
follows outwardly, the other possesses inwardly the persons that they
trouble. That since all Prophecies and visions are now ceased, all
spirits that appears in these forms are evil._

PHILOMATHES.

Come forward now to the rest of these kinds of spirits.

EPI. As to the next two kinds, that is, either these that outwardly
troubles and follows some persons, or else inwardly possesses them: I
will conjoin them in one, because as well the causes are alike in the
persons that they are permitted to trouble: as also the ways whereby they
may be remedied and cured.

PHI. What kind of persons are they that uses to be so troubled?

EPI. Two kinds in special: Either such as being guilty of grievous
offences, God punishes by that horrible kind of scourge, or else being
persons of the best nature perhaps, that you shall find in all the
Country about them, GOD permits them to be troubled in that sort, for
the trial of their patience, and wakening up of their zeal, for
admonishing of the beholders, not to trust over much in themselves, since
they are made of no better stuff, and perhaps blotted with no
smaller sins (as CHRIST said, (M25) speaking of them upon whom the
Tower in _Siloam_ fell:) And for giving likewise to the spectators, matter
to prays GOD, that they meriting no better, are yet spared from being
corrected in that fearful form.

PHI. These are good reasons for the part of GOD, which apparently
moves him so to permit the Devil to trouble such persons. But since the
Devil has ever a contrary respect in all the actions that GOD employs
him in: which is I pray you the end and mark he shoots at in this turn?

EPI. It is to obtain one of two things thereby, if he may: The one is
the loss of their life, by inducing them to such perilous places at
such time as he either follows or possesses them, which may procure the
same: And such like, so farr as GOD will permit him, by tormenting them
to weaken their body, and caste them in incurable diseases. The other
thing that he presses to obtain by troubling of them, is the loss of
their soul, by enticing them to mistrust and blaspheme God: Either for
the intolerability of their torments, as he assayed to have done with
JOB; (M26) or else for his promising unto them to leave the troubling of
them, in case they would so do, as is known by experience at this same
time by the confession of a young one that was so troubled.

PHI. Since you have spoken now of both these kinds of spirits
comprehending them in one: I must now go back again in asking some
questions of every one of these kinds in special. And first for these
that follows certain persons, you know that there are two sorts of
them: One sort that troubles and torments the persons that they haunt
with: An other sort that are serviceable unto them in all kind of their
necessaries, and omits never to forewarn them of any sudden peril
that they are to be in. And so in this case, I would understand whither
both these sorts be but wicked and damned spirits: Or if the last sort
be rather Angels, (as should appear by their actions) sent by God to
assist such as he especially favours. For it is written in the
Scriptures, (M27) that _God sends Legions of Angels to guard and watch
over his elect_.

EPI. I know well enough where from that error which you allege has
proceeded: For it was the ignorant _Gentiles_ that were the fountain
thereof. Who for that they knew not God, they forged in their own
imaginations, every man to be still accompanied with two spirits,
whereof they called the one _genius bonus_, the other _genius malus_: the
Greeks called them ευδαιμονα and κακοδαιμονα: whereof the former they said,
persuaded him to all the good he did: the other enticed him to all the
evil. But praised be God we that are christians, and walks not amongst the
_Cimmerian_ conjectures of man, knows well enough, that it is the good
spirit of God only, who is the fountain of all goodness, that persuades us
to the thinking or doing of any good: and that it is our corrupted flesh
and Satan, that entices us to the contrary. And yet the Devil for
confirming in the heads of ignorant Christians, that error first
maintained among the Gentiles, he whilst among the first kind of spirits
that I speak of, appeared in time of _Popery_ and blindness, and
haunted divers houses, without doing any evil, but doing as it were
necessary turns up and down the house: and this spirit they called
_Brownie_ in our language, who appeared like a rough-man: yes, some were
so blinded, as to believe that their house was all the luckier, as they
called it, that such spirits resorted there.

PHI. But since the Devil's intention in all his actions, is ever to do
evil, what evil was there in that form of doing, since their actions
outwardly were good.

EPI. Was it not evil enough to deceive simply ignorant, in making them
to take him for an Angel of light, and so to account of God's enemy, as
of their particular friend: where by the contrary, all we that are
Christians, ought assuredly to know that since the coming of Christ in
the flesh, and establishing of his Church by the Apostles, all miracles,
visions, prophecies, and appearances of Angels or good spirits are ceased.
Which served only for the first sowing of faith, and planting of the
Church. Where now the Church being established, and the white Horse
whereof I spoke before, having made his conquest, the Law and Prophets
are thought sufficient to serve us, or make us inexcusable, (M28) as
Christ says in his parable of _Lazarus_ and the rich man.




Chap. III.


ARGUMENT.

_The description of a particular sort of that kind of following spirits,
called __Incubi__ and __Succubi__: And what is the reason wherefore these
kinds of spirits haunts most the Northern and barbarous parts of the
world._

PHILOMATHES.

The next question that I would sphere, is likewise concerning this first
of these two kinds of spirits that you have conjoined: and it is this; you
know how it is commonly written and reported, that amongst the rest of
the sorts of spirits that follows certain persons, there is one more
monstrous than all the rest: in respect as it is alleged, they converse
naturally with them whom they trouble and haunts with: and therefore I
would know in two things your opinion herein: First if such a thing can
be: and next if it be: whether there be a difference of sexes amongst
these spirits or not.

EPI. That abominable kind of the Devil's abusing of men or women, was
called of old, _Incubi_ and _Succubi_, according to the difference of the
sexes that they conversed with. By two means this great kind of abuse
might possibly be performed: The one, when the Devil only as a spirit,
and stealing out the sperm of a dead body, abuses them that way, they
not readily seeing any shape or feeling any thing, but that which he
so conveys in that part: As we read of a Monastery of Nunes which were
burnt for their being that way abused. The other mean is when he borrows
a dead body and so visibly, and as it seems unto them naturally as a
man converses with them. But it is to be noted, that in whatsoever way he
uses it, that sperm seems intolerably cold to the person abused. For
if he steal out the nature of a quick person, it cannot be so quickly
carried, but it will both tin the strength and heat by the way, which it
could never have had for lack of agitation, which in the time of
procreation is the procurer and awakener up of these two natural qualities.
And if he occupying the dead body as his lodging expel the same out
thereof in the dew time, it must likewise be cold by the participation
with the qualities of the dead body out of which of it comes. And whereas you
inquire if these spirits be divided in sexes or not, I think the rules
of Philosophy may easily resolve a man of the contrary: For it is a
sure principle of that art, that nothing can be divided in sexes, except
such living bodies as must have a natural seed to genere by. But we know
spirits has no seed proper to themselves, nor yet can they gender one
with an other.

PHI. How is it then that they say sundry monsters have been gotten by
that way.

EPI. These tales are nothing but _Aniles fabulae_. For that they have no
nature of their own, I have showed you already. And that the cold nature
of a dead body, can work nothing in generation, it is more than plain,
as being already dead of itself as well as the rest of the body is,
wanting the natural heat, and such other natural operation, as is
necessary for working that effect, and in case such a thing were possible
(which were all utterly against all the rules of nature) it would breed no
monster, but only such a natural of-spring, as would have come between
that man or woman and that other abused person, in-case they both being
alive had had a do with other. For the Devil's part therein, is but the
naked carrying or expelling of that substance: And so it could not
participate with no quality of the same. Indeed, it is possible to the
craft of the Devil to make a woman's belly to swell after he has that way
abused her, which he may do, either by stirring up her own humor, or by
herbs, as we see beggars daily do. And when the time of her delivery
should come to make her suffer great sorrows, like unto that natural
course, and then subtly to slip in the Mid-wives hands, stocks,
stones, or some monstrous barn brought from some other place, but this
is more reported and guessed at by others, than believed by me.

PHI. But what is the cause that this kind of abuse is thought to be most
common in such wild parts of the world, as _Lap-land_, and _Fin-land_,
or in our North Ils of _Orkney_ and _Shetland_.

EPI. Because where the Devil finds greatest ignorance and barbarity,
there assails he grossly, as I gave you the reason wherefore there
was more Witches of women kind than men.

PHI. Can any be so unhappy as to give their willing consent to the
Devil's vile abusing them in this form.

EPI. Yes, some of the Witches have confessed, that he has persuaded them
to give their willing consent to it, that he may thereby have them
entangled the surer in his snares; But as the other compelled sort is to
be pitied and prayed for, so is this most highly to be punished and
detested.

PHI. It is not the thing which we cal the _Mare_, which takes folks
sleeping in their beds, a kind of these spirits, whereof you are
speaking?

EPI. No, that is but a natural sickness, which the Doctors has given
that name of _Incubus_ unto _ab incubando_, because it being a thick
phlegm, falling into our breast upon the hart, while we are sleeping,
intercludes so our vital spirits, and takes all power from us, as makes
us think that there were some unnatural burden or spirit, lying upon us
and holding us down.




Chap. IIII.


ARGUMENT.

_The description of the Demoniacs and possessed. By what reason the
__Papists__ may have power to cure them._

PHILOMATHES.

Well, I have told you now all my doubts, and you have satisfied me therein,
concerning the first of these two kinds of spirits that you have
conjoined. Now I am to inquire only two things at you concerning the
last kind, I mean the Demoniacs. The first is, whereby shall these
possessed folks be discerned from them that are troubled with a natural
Frenzy or Many. The next is, how can it be that they can be remedied by
the Papists Church, whom we counting as Heretics, (M29) it should
appear that one Devil should not cast out an other, for then would _his
kingdom be divided in it self_, as CHRIST said.

EPI. As to your first question; there are divers symptoms, whereby that
heavy trouble may be discerned from a natural sickness, and especially
three, omitting the divers vain signs that the _Papists_ attributes
unto it: Such as the raging at holy water, their fleeing a back from the
Croc, their not abiding the hearing of God named, and innumerable such
like vain things that were alike troublesome and feckless to recite. But to
come to these three symptoms then, whereof I spoke, I account the one of
them to be the incredible strength of the possessed creature, which will
farr exceed the strength of six of the wight and maddest of any other
men that are not so troubled. The next is the emboldening up so far of the
patients breast and belly, with such an unnatural stirring and vehement
agitation within them: And such an irony hardness of his sinews so
stiffly bended out, that it were not possible to prick out as it were
the skin of any other person so far: so mightily works the Devil in all
the members and senses of his body, he being locally within the same,
suppose of his soul and affections thereof, he have no more power then
of any other mans. The last is, the speaking of sundry languages, which
the patient is known by them that were acquaint with him never to have
learned, and that with an uncouth and hollow voice, and all the time of
his speaking, a greater motion being in his breast then in his mouth. But
from this last symptom is excepted such, as are altogether in the time of
their possessing bereft of all their senses being possessed with a dum
and blind spirit, whereof Christ relieved one, in the 12. of _Matthew_.
And as to your next demand, it is first to be doubted if the _Papists_
or any not professing the the only true Religion, can relieve any of
that trouble. And next, in-case they can, upon what respects it is
possible unto them. As to the former upon two reasons, it is grounded:
first that it is known so many of them to be counterfeit, which wil
the Clergy invents for confirming of their rotten Religion. The next is,
that by experience we find that few, who are possessed indeed, are
fully cured by them: but rather the Devil is content to release the
bodily hurting of them, for a short space, thereby to obtain the
perpetual hurt of the souls of so many that by these false miracles may
be induced or confirmed in the profession of that erroneous Religion: even
as I told you before that he does in the false cures, or casting off of
diseases by Witches. As to the other part of the argument in-case they
can, which rather (with reverence of the learned thinking otherwise) I am
induced to believe, by reason of the faithful report that men sound of
religion, have made according to their sight thereof, I think if so be, I
say these may be the respects, whereupon the _Papists_ may have that
power. CHRIST gave a commission and power to his Apostles to cast out
Devil's, which they according to it put in execution: The rules he
bad them observe in that action, was fasting and prayer: and the action it
self to be done in his name. This power of theirs proceeded not then of
any virtue in them, but only in him who directed them. As was clearly
proved by _Judas_ his having as great power in that commission, as any
of the rest. It is easy then to be understand that the casting out of
Devil's, is by the virtue of fasting and prayer, and in-calling of the
name of God, suppose many imperfections be in the person that is the
instrument,(M30) as CHRIST himself teaches us of the power that false
Prophets shall have to caste out Devils. It is no wonder then, these
respects of this action being considered, that it may be possible to the
_Papists_, though erring in sundry points of Religion to accomplish
this, if they use the right form prescribed by CHRIST herein. For what
the worse is that action that they err in other things, more then their
Baptism is the worse that they err in the other Sacrament, and have
eked many vain omens to the Baptism itself.

PHI. Surely it is no little wonder that God should permit the bodies of
any of the faithful to be so dishonored, as to be a dwelling place to
that unclean spirit.

EPI. There is it which I told right now, would prove and strengthen my
argument of the devils' entering in the dead bodies of the faithful. For if
he is permitted to enter in their living bodies, even when they are joined
with the soul: how much more will God permit him to enter in their dead
carrions, which is no more man, but the filthy and corruptible husk of
man. For as CHRIST saith, (M31) _It is not any thing that enters within
man that defiles him, but only that which proceeds and comes out of
him_.




Chap. V.


ARGUMENT.

_The description of the fourth kind of Spirits called the_ Fairy:
_What is possible therein, and what is but illusions. How far this
Dialogue entreats of all these things, and to what end._

PHILOMATHES.

Now I pray you come on to that fourth kind of spirits.

EPI. That fourth kind of spirits, which by the Gentiles was called
_Diana_, and her wandering court, and amongst us was called the _Fairy_
(as I told you) or our good neighbours, was one of the sorts of
illusions that was rife in the time of _Popery_: for although it was
holden odious to Prophesy by the devil, yet whom these kind of
Spirits carried away, and informed, they were thought to be luckiest and
of best life. To speak of the many vain chatter founded upon that
illusion: How there was a King and Queen of _Fairy_, of such a jolly
court and train as they had, how they had a tithe, and duty, as it were, of
all goods: how they naturally rode and went, eat and drank, and did all
other actions like natural men and women: I think it more like VIRGIL'S
_Campi Elysii_, than any thing that ought to be believed by Christians,
except in general, that as I spoke sundry times before, the devil
eluded the senses of sundry simply creatures, in making them believe that
they saw and hard such things as were nothing so indeed.

PHI. But how can it be then, that sundry Witches have gone to death with
that confession, that they have ben transported with the _Fairy_ to such
a hill, which opening, they went in, and there saw a fair Queen, who
being now lighter, gave them a stone that had sundry virtues, which at
sundry times has been produced in judgment?

EPI. I say that, even as I said before of that imaginary ravishing of the
spirit forth of the body. For may not the devil object to their
fantasy, their senses being dulled, and as it were a sleep, such hills
& houses within them, such glistening courts and trains, and whatsoever
such like wherewith he pleases to delude them. And in the mean time
their bodies being senseless, to convey in their hand any stone or such
like thing, which he makes them to imagine to have received in such a
place.

PHI. But what say you to their fore-telling the death of sundry persons,
whom they allege to have scene in these places? That is, a true dream
(as they say) since they see it walking.

EPI. I think that either they have not been sharply enough examined, that
gave so blunt a reason for their Prophesy, or otherwise, I think it
likewise as possible that the Devil may prophesy to them when he
deceives their imaginations in that sort, as well as when he plainly
speaks unto them at other times for their prophesying, is but by a kind
of vision, as it were, wherein he commonly counterfeits God among the
Pagans, as I told you before.

PHI. I would know now whether these kinds of spirits may only appear to
Witches, or if they may also appear to any other.

EPI. They may do to both, to the innocent sort, either to afraid them, or
to seem to be a better sort of folks than unclean spirits are, and to
the Witches, to be a color of safety for them, that ignorant
Magistrates may not punish them for it, as I told even now. But as the one
sort, for being perforce troubled with them ought to be pitied, so ought
the other sort (who may be discerned by their taking upon them to
Prophesy by them,) That sort I say, ought as severely to be punished as
any other Witches, and rather the more, that that they go dissemblingly
to work.

PHI. And what makes the spirits have so different names from others.

EPI. Even the knavery of that same devil; who as he eludes the
_Necromancers_ with innumerable feigned names for him and his angels, as in
special, making _Satan_, _Beelzebub_, and _Lucifer_, to be three sundry
spirits, where we find the two former, but divers names given to the
Prince of all the rebelling angels by the Scripture. As by CHRIST, the
Prince of all the Devil's is called, _Beelzebub_ in that place, which I
alleged against the power of any heretics to cast out Devils. By JOHN
in the Revelation, the old tempter is called, _Satan the Prince of all
the evil angels_. And the last, to wit, _Lucifer_, is but by allegorical
taken from _the day Star_ (so named in divers places of the Scriptures)
because of his excellency (I mean the Prince of them) in his creation
before his fall. Even so I say he deceives the Witches, by attributing to
himself divers names: as if every divers shape that he trans forms
himself in, were a divers kind of spirit.

PHI. But I have heard many more strange tales of this _Fairy_, than you have
yet told me.

EPI. As well I do in that, as I did in all the rest of my discourse. For
because the ground of this conference of ours, proceeded of your asking
at me at our meeting, if there was such a thing as Witches or spirits:
And if they had any power: I therefore have framed my whole discourse, only
to prove that such things are and may be, by such number of examples as I
show to be possible by reason: and keeps me from dipping any further in
playing the part of a Dictionary, to tell what ever I have read or hard
in that purpose, which both would exceed faith, and rather would seem to
teach such unlawful arts, than to disallow and condemn them, as it is
the duty of all Christians to do.




Chap. VI.


ARGUMENT.

_Of the trial and punishment of Witches. What sort of accusation ought
to be admitted against them. What is the cause of the increasing so far of
their number in this age._

PHILOMATHES.

Then to make an end of our conference, since I see it draws late, what
form of punishment think you merits these _Magicians_ and Witches? For I
see that you account them to be all alike guilty?

EPI. They ought to be put to death according to the Law of God, the civil
and imperial law, and municipal law of all Christian nations.

PHI. But what kind of death I pray you?

EPI. It is commonly used by fire, but that is an indifferent thing to be
used in every country, according to the Law or custom thereof.

PHI. But ought no sex, age nor rank to be exempted?

EPI. None at all (being so used by the lawful Magistrate) for it is the
highest point of Idolatry, wherein no exception is admitted by the law of
God.

PHI. Then children may not be spared?

EPI. Yes, not a hair the less of my conclusion. For they are not that
capable of reason as to practice such things. And for any being in
company and not revealing thereof, their less and ignorant age will no
doubt excuse them.

PHI. I see you condemn them all that are of the counsel of such crafts.

EPI. No doubt, for as I said, speaking of _Magic_, the consulters,
trusters in, overseers, entertainers or stirrers up of these
crafts-folk, are equally guilty with themselves that are the
practitioners.

PHI. Whether may the Prince then, or supreme Magistrate, spare or
over-see any that are guilty of that craft? upon some great respects
known to him?

EPI. The Prince or Magistrate for further trials cause, may continue the
punishing of them such a certain space as he thinks convenient: But in
the end to spare the life, and not to strike when God bids strike, and so
severely punish in so odious a fault and treason against God, it is not
only unlawful, but doubtless no less sin in that Magistrate, than it
was in SAUL'S sparing of AGAG. And so comparable (M32) to the sin of
Witchcraft itself, as SAMUEL alleged at that time.

PHI. Surely then, I think since this crime ought to be so severely
punished. Judges ought to beware to condemn any, but such as they are
sure are guilty, neither should the clattering report of a hag serve
in so weighty a case.

EPI. Judges ought indeed to beware whom they condemn: For it is as
great a crime (M33) (as SOLOMON says,) _To condemn the innocent, as to
let the guilty escape free_; neither ought the report of any one infamous
person, be admitted for a sufficient proof, which can stand of no law.

PHI. And what may a number then of guilty persons confessions, work
against one that is accused?

EPI. The assize must serve for interpreter of our law in that respect.
But in my opinion, since in a mater of treason against the Prince, barnes
or wives, or never so defamed persons, may of our law serve for
sufficient witnesses and proofs. I think surely that by a far greater
reason, such witnesses may be sufficient in matters of high treason
against God: For who but Witches can be proves, and so witnesses of the
doings of Witches.

PHI. Indeed, I believe they will be loath to put any honest man upon their
counsel. But what if they accuse folk to have been present at their
Imaginary conventions in the spirit, when their bodies lies senseless,
as you have said.

EPI. I think they are not a hair the less guilty: For the Devil durst
never have borrowed their shadow or similitude to that turn, if their
consent had not been at it: And the consent in these turns is death of
the law.

PHI. Then SAMUEL was a Witch: For the Devil resembled his shape, and
played his person in giving response to SAUL.

EPI. SAMUEL was dead as well before that; and so none could slander him
with meddling in that unlawful art. For the cause why, as I take it, that
God will not permit Satan to use the shapes or similitudes of any
innocent persons at such unlawful times, is that God will not permit that
any innocent persons shall be slandered with that vile defection: for then
the devil would find ways anew, to calumniate the best. And this we have
in proof by them that are carried with the _Fairy_, who never see the
shadows of any in that court, but of them that thereafter are tried to
have been brethren and sisters of that craft. And this was likewise proved
by the confession of a young Lass, troubled with spirits, laid on her
by Witchcraft. That although she saw the shapes of diverse men and women
troubling her, and naming the persons whom these shadows represents: yet
never one of them are found to be innocent, but all clearly tried to be
most guilty, and the most part of them confessing the same. And besides
that, I think it has ben seldom hard tell of, that any whom persons
guilty of that crime accused, as having known them to be their marrows
by eye-sight, and not by hear-say, but such as were so accused of
Witchcraft, could not be clearly tried upon them, were at the least
publicly known to be of a very evil life and reputation: so jealous is God
I say, of the fame of them that are innocent in such causes. And besides
that; there are two other good helps that may be used for their trial:
the one is the finding of their mark, and the trying the insensibility
thereof. The other is their fleeting on the water: for as in a secret
murder, if the dead carcass be at any time thereafter handled by the
murderer, it will gush out of blood, as if the blvd were crying to the
heaven for revenge of the murderer, God having appointed that secret
super-natural sign, for trial of that secret unnatural crime, so it
appears that God has appointed (for a super-natural sign of the
monstrous impiety of the Witches) that the water shall refuse to receive
them in her bosom, that have shaken off them the sacred Water of Baptism,
and willfully refused the benefit thereof: No not so much as their eyes
are able to shed tears (threaten and torture them as you please) while
first they repent (God not permitting them to dissemble their obstinacy
in so horrible a crime) although the women kind especially, be able
otherwise to shed tears at every light occasion when they will, yes,
although it were dissemblingly like the _Crocodiles_.

PHI. Well, we have made this conference to last as long as leisure would
permit: And to conclude then, since I am to take my leave of you, I pray
God to purge this Country of these devilish practices: for they were
never so rife in these parts, as they are now.

EPI. I pray God that so be to. But the causes are over manifest, that makes
them to be so rife. For the great wickedness of the people on the one
part, procures this horrible defection, whereby God justly punishes
sin, by a greater iniquity. And on the other part, the consummation of
the world, and our deliverance drawing near, (M34) makes Satan to rage
the more in his instruments, knowing his kingdom to be so near an end.
And so fare-well for this time.

FINIS.





NEWS FROM SCOTLAND.


Declaring the Damnable _life and death of Doctor Fian, a_ notable
Sorcerer, who was burnt at Edinburgh in January last. 1591.

_Which Doctor was register to the Devil_ that sundry times preached at
North Berwick Church, to a number of notorious Witches.

With the true examinations of the said Doctor and Witches, as they
uttered them in the presence _of the Scottish King_.

Discovering how they pretended _to bewitch and drown his Majesty in the
Sea_ coming from Denmark with such _other wonderful matters as the like
has not been heard of at any time_.

Published according to the Scottish Copy.

AT LONDON
Printed for William _Wright_.

To the Reader.


The Manifold untruths which is spread abroad, concerning the detestable
actions and apprehension of those Witches whereof this History following
truly entreats, has caused me to publish the same in print: and the
rather for that sundry written Copies are lately dispersed thereof,
containing, that the said witches were first discovered, by means of a
poor Peddler traveling to the town of _Tranent_, and that by a
wonderful manner he was in a moment conveyed at midnight, from _Scotland_
to _Bordeaux_ in _France_ (being places of no small distance between)
into a Merchants Seller there, and after, being sent from _Bordeaux_ into
_Scotland_ by certain Scottish Merchants to the King's Majesty, that he
discovered those Witches and was the cause of their apprehension: with a
number of matters miraculous and incredible: All which in truth are most
false. Nevertheless to satisfy a number of honest minds, who are desirous
to be informed of the verity and truth of their confessions, which for
certainty is more stranger then the common report runs, and yet with
more truth I have undertaken to publish this short Treatise, which
declares the true discourse of all that has happened, and as well what was
pretended by those wicked and detestable Witches against the Kings
Majesty, as also by what means they wrought the same.

All which examinations (gentle Reader) I have here truely published, as
they were taken and uttered in the presence of the King's Majesty, praying
you to accept it for verity, the same being so true as cannot be
reproved.




Discourse.


A true discourse, of the apprehension of sundry Witches lately taken in
Scotland, some are executed, and some are yet imprisoned.

With a particular recital of their examinations, taken in the presence of
the King's Majesty.

God by his omnipotent power, has at all times and daily does take such
care, and is so vigilant, for the weal and preservation of his own,
that thereby he disappoints the wicked practices and evil intents of all
such as by any means whatsoever, seek indirectly to conspire any thing
contrary to his holy will: yes and by the same power, he has lately
overthrown and hindered the intentions and wicked dealings of a great
number of ungodly creatures, no better then Devils: who suffering
themselves to be allured and enticed by the Devil whom they served, and
to whom they were privately sworn: entered into the detestable Art of
witchcraft, which they studied and practised so long time, that in the end
they had seduced by their sorcery a number of other to be as bad as
themselves: dwelling in the bounds of _Lothian_, which is a principal
shire or part of _Scotland_, where the King's Majesty uses to make his
chef residence or abode: and to the end that their detestable
wickedness which they secretly had pretended against the King's Majesty,
the Commonwealth of that Country, with the Nobility and subjects of the
same, should come to light: God of his unspeakable goodness did reveal
and lay it open in very strange sort, thereby to make known unto the
world, that there actions were contrary to the law of God, and the
natural affection which we ought generally to bear one to another: the
manner of the revealing whereof was as follows.

Within the town of _Tranent_ in the Kingdom of _Scotland_, there
dwells one _David Seaton_, who being deputy Bailiff in the said
Town, had a maid servant called _Geillis Duncan_, who used secretly to
be absent and to ly forth of her Masters house every other night: this
_Geillis Duncan_ took in hand to help all such as were troubled or
grieved with any kind of sickness or infirmity: and in short space did
perform many matters most miraculous, which things forasmuch as she
began to do them upon a sudden, having never don the like before, made
her Master and others to be in great amazement, and wondered thereat: by
means whereof the said _David Seaton_ had his maid in some great
suspicion, that she did not those things by natural and lawful ways,
but rather supposed it to be done by some extraordinary and unlawful
means.

Whereupon, her Master began to grow very inquisitive, and examined her
which way and by what means she were able to perform matters of so
great importance: whereat she gave him no answer, nevertheless, her
Master to the intent that he might the better try and find out the
truth of the same, did with the help of others, torment her with the
torture of the Thumbscrews upon her fingers, which is a grievous torture,
and binding or wrenching her head with a cord or rope, which is a most
cruel torment also, yet would she not confess any thing, whereupon they
suspecting that she had been marked by the Devil (as commonly witches
are) made diligent search about her, and found the enemies mark to be in
her fore crag or forepart of her throat: which being found, she
confessed that all her doings was done by the wicked enticements and
enticements of the Devil, and that she did them by witchcraft.

After this her confession, she was committed to prison, where she
continued for a season, where immediately she accused these persons
following to be notorious witches, and caused them forthwith to be
apprehended one after an other, viz.. _Agnes Samson_ the eldest Witch of
them all, dwelling in Haddington, _Agnes Tompson_ of Edinburgh, Doctor
_Fian_, _alias John Cunningham_, master of the School at Salt pans in
Lothian, of whose life and strange acts, you shall hear more largely in
the end of this discourse: these were by the said _Geillis Duncan_
accused, as also _George Motes_ wife dwelling in Salt pans, _Robert
Grierson_ skipper, and _Janet Bandilandis_, with the Porters wife of
Seaton, the Smith at the brig Hallis with innumerable others in that
parts, and dwelling in those bounds aforesaid: of whom some are already
executed, the rest remain in prison, to receive the doom of Judgment at
the Kings majesty's will and pleasure.

The said _Geillis Duncan_ also caused _Euphame Meealrean_ to be
apprehended, who conspired and performed the death of her Godfather, and
who used her art upon a gentleman being one of the Lords and Justices of
the Session, for bearing good will to her Daughter: she also caused to be
apprehended one _Barbara Napier_, for bewitching to death _Archibald_,
last Earl of Angus, who languished to death by witchcraft and yet the
same was not suspected, but that he died of so strange a disease, as the
Physician knew not how to cure or remedy the same: but of all other the
said witches, these two last before recited, were reputed for as civil
honest women as any that dwelt within the Citi of Edinburgh, before
they were apprehended. Many other besides were taken dwelling in Lies,
who are detained in prison, until his Majesty's further will and pleasure
be known: of whose wicked doings you shall particularly hear, which was
as follows.

This aforesaid _Agnes Samson_ which was the elder Witch, was taken and
brought to Holyrood house before the King's Majesty and sundry other of
the nobility of Scotland, where she was straitly examined, but all the
persuasions which the King's majesty used to her with the rest of his
counsel, might not provoke or induce her to confess any thing, but stood
stiffly in the denial of all that was laid to her charge: whereupon they
caused her to be conveyed away to prison, there to receive such torture
as has been lately provided for witches in that country: and forasmuch as
by due examination of witchcraft and witches in Scotland, it has lately
been found that the Devil doth generally mark them with a privy
mark, by reason the Witches have confessed themselves, that the Devil
doth lick them with his tongue in some privy part of their body, before
he doth receive them to be his servants, which mark commonly is given
them under the hair in some part of their body, whereby it may not easily
be found out or scene, although they be searched: and generally so long as
the mark is not seen to those which search them, so long the parties
that has the mark will never confess any thing. Therefore by special
commandment this _Agnes Samson_ had all her hair shaven of, in each
part of her body, and her head twisted with a rope according to the
custom of that Country, being a pain most grievous, which she
continued almost an hour, during which time she would not confess any
thing until the Devils mark was found upon her secrets, then she
immediately confessed whatsoever was demanded of her, and justifying
those persons aforesaid to be notorious witches.

Item, the said _Agnes Tompson_ was after brought again before the Kings
Majesty and his Counsel, and being examined of the meetings and
detestable dealings of those witches, she confessed that upon the night of
_Allhallow_ Even last, she was accompanied as well with the persons
aforesaid, as also with a great many other witches, to the number of two
hundred: and that all they together went by Sea each one in a Riddle or
Civ, and went in the same very substantially with Flagons of wine making
merry and drinking by the way in the same Riddles or Citizens, to the Church
of North Berwick in Lothian, and that after they had landed, took hands
on the land and danced this reel or short dance, singing all with one
voice.

_Gossip go you before, gossip go you,_
_If you will not go before, gossip let me._

At which time she confessed, that this _Geillis Duncan_ did go before
them playing this reel or dance upon a small Trump, called a Jews
Trump, until they entered into the Church of north Berwick.

These confessions made the King in a wonderful admiration, and sent for the
said _Geillis Duncan_, who upon the like Trump did play the said dance
before the King's Majesty, who in respect of the strangeness of these
matters, took great delight to be present at their examinations.

Item, the said _Agnes Tompson_ confessed that the Devil being then at
North Berwick Church attending their coming in the habit or likeness of a
man, and seeing that they tarried over long, he at their coming enjoined
them all to a penance, which was, that they should kiss his Buttocks,
in sign of duty to him: which being put over the Pulpit barr, every
one did as he had enjoined them: and having made his ungodly exhortations,
wherein he did greatly inveigh against the King of Scotland, he received
their oaths for their good and true service towards him, and departed:
which done, they returned to Sea, and so home again.

At which time the witches demanded of the Devil why he did bear such
hatred to the King, who answered, by reason the King is the greatest enemy
he has in the world: all which their confessions and depositions are
still extant upon record.

Item, the said _Agnes Samson_ confessed before the King's Majesty
sundry things which were so miraculous and strange, as that his Majesty
said they were all extreme liars, at which she answered, she would not
wish his Majesty to suppose her words to be false, but rather to
believe them, in that she would discover such matter unto him as his
majesty should not any way doubt off.

And thereupon taking his Majesty a little aside, she declared unto him the
very words which passed between the King's Majesty and his Queen at
Oslo in Norway the first night of their marriage, with their answer each
to other: whereat the King's Majesty wondered greatly, and swore by the
living God, that he believed that all the Devils in hell could not have
discovered the same: acknowledging her words to be most true, and
therefore gave the more credit to the rest which is before declared.

Touching this _Agnes Tompson_, she is the only woman, who by the Devils
persuasion should have intended and put in execution the Kings Majesty's
death in this manner.

She confessed that she took a black Toad, and did hang the same up by
the heels, three days, and collected and gathered the venom as it
dropped and fell from it in an Oyster shell, and kept the same venom
close covered, until she should obtain any part or piece of foul
linen cloth, that had pertained to the King's Majesty, as shirt,
handkerchief, napkin or any other thing which she practised to obtain by
means of one _John Kers_, who being attendant in his Majesty's Chamber,
desired him for old acquaintance between them, to help her to one or a
piece of such a cloth as is aforesaid, which thing the said _John Kers_
denied to help her too, saying he could not help her too it.

And the said _Agnes Tompson_ by her depositions since her apprehension
says, that if she had obtained any one piece of linen cloth which the
King had worn and fouled, she had bewitched him to death, and put him to
such extraordinary pains, as if he had been lying upon sharp thorns and
ends of Needles.

Moreover she confessed that at the time when his Majesty was in Denmark,
she being accompanied with the parties before specially named, took a Cat
and christened it, and afterward bound to each part of that Cat, the
chef parts of a dead man, and several joints of his body, and that
in the night following the said Cat was conveyed into the midst of the
sea by all these witches sailing in their riddles or Citizens as is
aforesaid, and so left the said Cat right before the Town of Lies in
Scotland: this done, there did arise such a tempest in the Sea, as a
greater has not been seen: which tempest was the cause of the
perishing of a Boat or vessel coming over from the town of Brunt
Island to the town of Lies, wherein was sundry Jewels and rich
gifts, which should have been presented to the now Queen of Scotland, at
her Majesty's coming to Lies.

Again it is confessed, that the said christened Cat was the cause that
the Kings Majesty's Ship at his coming forth of Denmark, had a
contrary wind to the rest of his Ships, then being in his company, which
thing was most strange and true, as the King's Majesty acknowledges, for
when the rest of the Ships had a fair and good wind, then was the
wind contrary and altogether against his Majesty: and further the said
witch declared, that his Majesty had never come safely from the Sea, if
his faith had not prevailed above their intentions.

Moreover the said Witches being demanded how the Devil would use them
when he was in their company, they confessed that when the Devil did
receive them for his servants, and that they had vowed themselves unto
him, then he would Carnally use them, although to their little pleasure, in
respect of his cold nature: and would doo the like at sundry other times.

As touching the aforesaid Doctor _Fian, alias John Cunningham_, the
examination of his acts since his apprehension, declares the great
subtlety of the devil, and therefore makes things to appear the more
miraculous: for being apprehended by the accusation of the said _Geillis
Duncan_ aforesaid, who confessed he was their Register, and that there
was not one man suffered to come to the Devils readings but only he: the
said Doctor was taken and imprisoned, and used with the accustomed pain,
provided for those offences, inflicted upon the rest as is aforesaid.

First by twisting of his head with a rope, at which he would confess
nothing.

Secondly, he was persuaded by fair means to confess his follies, but
that would prevail as little.

Lastly he was put to the most severe and cruel pain in the world, called
the boots, who after he had received three strokes, being inquired if he
would confess his damnable acts and wicked life, his tongue would not serve
him to speak, in respect whereof the rest of the witches willed to search
his tongue, under which was found two pins thrust up into the head,
whereupon the witches did lay, _Now is the Charm stinted_, and showed
that those charmed Pins were the cause he could not confess any thing:
then was he immediately released of the boots, brought before the King,
his confession was taken, and his own hand willingly set ther-unto, which
contained as follows.

First, that at the general meetings of those witches, he was always
present: that he was Clarke to all those that were in subjection to the
Devils service, bearing the name of witches, that always he did take their
oaths for their true service to the Devil, and that he wrote for them such
matters as the Devil still pleased to command him.

Item, he confessed that by his witchcraft he did bewitch a Gentleman
dwelling near to the Salt pans, where the said Doctor kept School, only
for being enamored of a Gentlewoman whom he loved himself: by means of
which his Sorcery, witchcraft and devilish practices, he caused the said
Gentleman that once in 24. hours he fell into a lunacy and madness,
and so continued one whole hour together, and for the verity of the
same, he caused the Gentleman to be brought before the King's Majesty,
which was upon the 24. day of December last, and being in his
Majesty's Chamber, suddenly he gave a great screech and fell into a
madness, sometime bending himself, and sometime capering so directly up,
that his head did touch the ceiling of the Chamber, to the great
admiration of his Majesty and others then present: so that all the
Gentlemen in the Chamber were not able to hold him, until they called in
more help, who together bound him hand and foot: and suffering the said
gentleman to ly still until his fury were past, he within an hour came
again to himself, when being demanded of the King's Majesty what he saw
or did all that while, answered that he had been in a sound sleep.

Item the said Doctor did also confess that he had used means sundry times
to obtain his purpose and wicked intent of the same Gentlewoman, and
seeing himself disappointed of his intention, he determined by all ways
he might to obtain the same, trusting by conjuring, witchcraft and
Sorcery to obtain it in this manner.

It happened this gentlewoman being unmarried, had a brother who went to
school with the said Doctor, and calling his Scholar to him, demanded
if he did ly with his sister, who answered he did, by means whereof he
thought to obtain his purpose, and therefore secretly promised to teach
him without stripes, so he would obtain for him three hairs of his
sisters secrets, at such time as he should spy best occasion for it:
which the youth promised faithfully to perform, and vowed speedily to
put it in practice, taking a piece of conjured paper of his master to
lap them in when he had gotten them: and thereupon the boy practised
nightly to obtain his masters purpose, especially when his sister was a
sleep.

But God who knows the secrets of all hearts, and reveals all wicked and
ungodly practices, would not suffer the intents of this devilish Doctor
to come to that purpose which he supposed it would, and therefore to
declare that he was heavily offended with his wicked intent, did so
work by the Gentlewoman's own means, that in the end the same was
discovered and brought to light: for she being one night a sleep, and her
brother in bed with her, suddenly cried out to her mother, declaring that
her Brother would not suffer her to sleep, whereupon her mother having a
quick capacity, did vehemently suspect Doctor _Fian's_ intention, by
reason she was a witch of herself, and therefore presently arose, and
was very inquisitive of the boy to understand his intent, and the better
to know the same, did beat him with sundry stripes, whereby he discovered
the truth unto her.

The Mother therefore being well practised in witchcraft, did think it
most convenient to meet with the Doctor in his own Art, and thereupon
took the paper from the boy, wherein he should have put the same hairs,
and went to a young Heifer which never had borne Calf nor gone to the
Bull, and with a pair of shears, clipped off three hairs from the udder
of the Cow, and wrapt them in the same paper, which she again delivered
to the boy, then willing him to give the same to his said Master, which
he immediately did.

The Schoolmaster so soon as he had received them, thinking them indeed
to be the Maids hairs, went straight and wrought his art upon them:
But the Doctor had no sooner done his intent to them, but presently the
Heifer or Cow whose hairs they were indeed, came unto the door of the
Church wherein the Schoolmaster was, into the which the Heifer went, and
made towards the Schoolmaster, leaping and dancing upon him, and
following him forth of the church and to what place so ever he went, to
the great admiration of all the towns men of Salt pans, and many other who
did behold the same.

The report whereof made all men imagine that he did work it by the
Devil, without whom it could never have been so sufficiently effected:
and thereupon, the name of the said Doctor _Fian_ (who was but a very yong
man) began to grow so common among the people of Scotland, that he was
secretly nominated for a notable Conjurer.

All which although in the beginning he denied, and would not confess, yet
having felt the pain of the boots (and the charm stinted, as aforesaid)
he confessed all the aforesaid to be most true, without producing any
witnesses to justify the same, and thereupon before the kings majesty he
subscribed the said confessions with his own hand, which for truth
remains upon record in _Scotland_.

After that the depositions and examinations of the said doctor _Fian Alias
Cunningham_ was taken, as already is declared, with his own hand
willingly set to it, he was by the master of the prison committed to
ward, and appointed to a chamber by himself, where forsaking his wicked
ways, acknowledging his most ungodly life, showing that he had too much
followed the enticements and enticements of Satan, and fondly practised
his conclusions by conjuring, witchcraft, enchantment, sorcery, and such
like, he renounced the devil and all his wicked works, vowed to lead
the life of a Christian, and seemed newly connected towards God.

The morrow after upon conference had with him, he granted that the devil
had appeared unto him in the night before, dressed all in black, with a
white wand in his hand, and that the devil demanded of him if he would
continue his faithful service, according to his first oath and promise
made to that effect. Whom (as he then said) he utterly renounced to his
face, and said unto him in this manner, _Avoid Satan, avoid_, for I
have listened too much unto you, and by the same you have undone me, in
respect whereof I utterly forsake you. To whom the devil answered,
_That once before you die you shall be mine_. And with that (as he said)
the devil brake the white wand, and immediately vanished forth of his
sight.

Thus all the dai this Doctor Fian continued very solitary, and seemed
to have care of his own soul, and would call upon God, showing himself
penitent for his wicked life, nevertheless the same night he found such
means, that he stole the key of the prison door and chamber in the
which he was, which in the night he opened and fled away to the Salt
pans, where he was always resident, and first apprehended. Of whose
sudden departure when the King's majesty had intelligence, he presently
commanded diligent inquiry to be made for his apprehension, and for the
better effecting thereof, he sent public proclamations into all parts
of his land to the same effect. By means of whose hot and hard
pursuit, he was again taken and brought to prison, and then being called
before the kings highness, he was reexamined as well touching his
departure, as also touching all that had before happened.

But this Doctor, notwithstanding that his own confession appears
remaining in record under his own hand writing, and the same to it
fixed in the presence of the King's majesty and sundry of his Counsel,
yet did he utterly deny the same.

Whereupon the king's majesty perceiving his stubborn willfulness,
concerned and imagined that in the time of his absence he had entered
into new conference and league with the devil his master, and that he
had been again newly marked, for the which he was narrowly searched,
but it could not in any wise be found, yet for more trial of him to
make him confess, he was commanded to have a most strange torment
which was done in this manner following.

His nails upon all his fingers were riven and pulled off with an
instrument called in Scottish a _Pincers_, which in England we call a
payer of pincers, and under every nail there was thrust in two needles
over even up to the heads. At all which torments notwithstanding the
Doctor never shrank any whit, neither would he then confess it the
sooner for all the tortures inflicted upon him.

Then was he with all convenient speed, by commandment, conveyed again
to the torment of the boots, wherein he continued a long time, and did
abide so many blows in them, that his legs were crushed and beaten
together as small as might be, and the bones and flesh so bruised, that
the blood and marrow spouted forth in great abundance, whereby they were
made unserviceable for ever. And notwithstanding all these grievous pains
and cruel torments he would not confess any thing, so deeply had the
devil entered into his heart, that he utterly denied all that which he
had before affirmed, and would say nothing to it but this, that what
he had done and said before, was only done and said for fear of
pains which he had endured.

Upon great consideration therefore taken by the King's majesty and his
Counsel, as well for the due execution of justice upon such detestable
malefactors, as also for example sake, to remain a terror to all others
hereafter, that shall attempt to deal in the like wicked and ungodly
actions, as witchcraft, sorcery, conjuration, and such like, the said
Doctor _Fian_ was soon after arraigned, condemned, and adjudged by the law
to die, and then to be burnt according to the law of that land,
provided in that behalf. Whereupon he was put into a cart, and being
first strangled, he was immediately put into a great fire, being ready
provided for that purpose, and there burnt in the Castle hill of
_Edinburgh_ on a saturday in the end of January last past. 1591. The
rest of the witches which are not yet executed, remain in prison till
farther trial, and knowledge of his majesty's pleasure.

_This strange discourse before recited, may perhaps give some occasion of
doubt to such as shall happen to read the same, and thereby conjecture
that the King's majesty would not hazard himself in the presence of such
notorious witches, least thereby might have ensued great danger to his
person and the general state of the land, which thing in truth might well
have been feared. But to answer generally to such, let this suffice: that
first it is well known that the King is the child and servant of God, and
they but servants to the devil, he is the Lords anointed, and they but
vessels of God's wrath: he is a true Christian, and trusts in God, they
worse than Infidels, for they only trust in the devil, who daily serve
them, till he have brought them to utter destruction. But hereby it
seems that his Highness carted a magnanimous and undaunted mind, not
feared with their enchantments, but resolute in this, that so long as God
is with him, he fears not who is against him. And truly the whole
scope of this treatise doth so plainly lai open the wonderful
providence of the Almighty, that if he had not been defended by his
omnipotence and power, his Highness had never returned alive in his voyage
frõ Denmark, so that there is no dolt but God would as well defend him
on the land as on the sea, where they pretended their damnable practice._

_FINIS._








